Delft University of Technology

Quantifying the probability of light damage to masonry structures
An exploration of crack initiation and progression due to seismic vibrations on masonry
buildings with existing damage
Korswagen, Paul A.
DOI
10.4233/uuid:e56827d2-c821-4547-922e-ea24bd748e68
Publication date
2024
Document Version
Final published version
Citation (APA)
Korswagen, P. A. (2024). Quantifying the probability of light damage to masonry structures: An exploration
of crack initiation and progression due to seismic vibrations on masonry buildings with existing damage.
[Dissertation (TU Delft), Delft University of Technology]. https://doi.org/10.4233/uuid:e56827d2-c821-4547922e-ea24bd748e68
Important note
To cite this publication, please use the final published version (if applicable).
Please check the document version above.

Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download, forward or distribute the text or part of it, without the consent
of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license such as Creative Commons.
Takedown policy
Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights.
We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.

This work is downloaded from Delft University of Technology.
For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to a maximum of 10.

QUANTIFYING THE PROBABILITY OF
LIGHT DAMAGE TO MASONRY
STRUCTURES

AN EXPLORATION OF CRACK INITIATION AND
PROGRESSION DUE TO SEISMIC VIBRATIONS ON
MASONRY BUILDINGS WITH EXISTING DAMAGE

QUANTIFYING THE PROBABILITY OF
LIGHT DAMAGE TO MASONRY
STRUCTURES

AN EXPLORATION OF CRACK INITIATION AND
PROGRESSION DUE TO SEISMIC VIBRATIONS ON
MASONRY BUILDINGS WITH EXISTING DAMAGE

Dissertation
for the purpose of obtaining the degree of doctor
at Delft University of Technology,
by the authority of the Rector Magnificus, Prof.dr.ir. T.H.J.J. van der Hagen,
chair of the Board for Doctorates,
to be defended publicly on
16 October 2024 at 12:30

by

Paul Alexander KORSWAGEN EGUREN
Master of Science in Civil Engineering,
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
born in Lima, Perú

his dissertation has been approved by the promotors:

of. dr. ir. J.G. Rots
of. dr. ir. M.A.N. Hendriks
This dissertation has been approved by the promotors:
omposition ofProf.dr.ir.
the doctoral
committee:
J.G. Rots
ctor Magnificus
Chairman
Dr.ir. K.C. Terwel
of. dr. ir. J.G. Rots
Delft University of Technology, Promotor
Composition
committee:
of. dr. ir. M.A.N.
Hendriks of the doctoral
Delft University
of Technology, Promotor
Rector Magnificus
Chairman
dependent members:
Prof.dr.ir.
J.G. Rots
Promotor, Delft University of Technology, NL
K.C. Terwel
Co-promotor,
Delft University of Technology, NL
of. dr. ir. L.J. Dr.ir.
Sluys
Delft University
of Technology
of. dr. A. Scarpas
Delft University of Technology
Independent members:
& Khalifa University, United Arab Emirates
Prof.dr.ir.
S.N. Jonkman
University
of Technology, NL
of. dr. ing. K.V.
Høiseth
Norwegian University ofDelft
Science
& Technology
(NTNU),
Norway
Prof.dr.ir.
M.A.N.
Hendriks
Delft University of Technology, NL
of. dr. G.P.A.G.
van Zijl
Stellenbosch
University,
South
Africa of Technology, NL
Prof.dr.ir.
S.N.M.
Wijte
Eindhoven
University
. ing. J. Eliáš Prof.dr.
Brno
University
of
Technology,
Czech
Republic
P.B. Lourenço
University
of Minho, PT
Assoc.Prof.dr. K. Beyer
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH

Parts
of this research
performed
within
the scope
of the projects:
is research was
performed
underwere
the project
Physical
testing
and modelling
- masonry
Damageand
sensitivity
of Groningen
Masonry
Structures,
funded by B.V.
Nederlandse
uctures, Groningen,
was funded
by Nederlandse
Aardolie
Maatschappij
(NAM).
Aardolie Maatschappij B.V. (NAM);
Advies Schadebeoordeling IMG [WP2.3, 2.4, 3.2, 3.3, 5.1], funded by the
Instituut Mijnbouwschade Groningen (IMG);
ywords:
Sequentially
Linear Analysis,
Quasi-brittle
fracture,
Onderzoek naar de oorzaken
van bouwkundige
schade
in Groningen,
funded
Non-proportional
loading, Pushover Analysis, Forceby Nationaal Coördinator
Groningen (NCG).
Release method, 3D Fixed smeared crack model,
Composite interface model, Direct & Iterative linear
Keywords:
Unreinforced
solvers. Masonry (URM), Light Damage, Probabilistic
Quantification, DIC

inted by:

Printed by:

IPSKAMP
Ipskamp Printing, The Netherlands.

over design: Cover design: Author
Manimaran Pari

Copyright
© 2024
by P. Korswagen.
opyright © 2020
by M. Pari.
All rights
reserved. All rights reserved.
ISBN 978-94-6384-648-6
BN 978-94-6366-331-1

An electronic
of thisisdissertation
n electronic version
of this version
dissertation
available atis available at:
http://repository.tudelft.nl/
tp://repository.tudelft.nl/.

to my mother…

In this image, there are
6.2 million points. The
displacement of each was
determined from a digital
photograph and magnified
400 times. Each square in
the grid represents 0.1
mm of displacement.
This serves to measure
cracks in a masonry wall
with a window opening.

This book in one page

To quantify damage to unreinforced masonry structures, sensitive to tensile
stresses and thus to vibrations caused by induced earthquakes in the north of
the Netherlands, a bottom-up or physical approach has been followed. First,
the crack-based damage expected on these common structures, was defined
on a continuous scale (Ψ) based on width, length and number of cracks, so that
it could also be quantified. Then, the initiation of cracks was investigated on
full-scale masonry walls, single-wythe and of fired-clay bricks, using high
resolution Digital Image Correlation; at 0.1 mm in width, cracks become visible.
Further, the propagation of cracks, as they widen and lengthen, was monitored
during repeated and cyclic testing. At repeated, identical in-plane drift, cracks
still propagate and damage increases, though the increase is minor.
The experiments on walls and spandrels, displaying horizontal, diagonal, and
vertical cracks, were used to calibrate numerical, finite-element-method
models. These reproduced the behaviour of the tests also in terms of crack
patterns and propagation, besides stiffness, strength, and hysteresis. Then, the
models were adapted to explore the effect of earthquake vibrations, also in
combination with existing damage caused by settlement-like actions. In this
manner, the effect of initial damage could be quantified. Several other
parameters were varied, such as the material strength, the geometry of the
masonry walls, the soil properties in a soil-structure interaction interface, the
record, PGV, and repetition of the vibrations, and the intensity of initial
damage.
Relationships between these parameters and damage were captured into a
surrogate model, which was used in a MonteCarlo simulation to determine the
probability of damage. The fragility curves reveal, for instance, that fired-clay
brick walls with no visible pre-damage (Ψ0=0) have a 5% chance of visible
damage (Ψ≥1) at a PGV of, for example, 10 mm/s, a probability that rose to
20% if the walls had undetectable pre-existing damage (Ψ0=0.5). The
probability of exceeding aesthetic damage (Ψ≈2.5) at this PGV is less than 1%.
A lower PGV is associated with a smaller probability of damage.
Furthermore, it was concluded that repeated events lead to an increase in
damage of about 10% for five similar events. This increase is not noticeable. In
a sequence of events, similar events accumulate little damage and increases
appear when larger events are experienced by a masonry structure.

Abstract

Abstract

Summary
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Appendices

II

Table of Contents

Table of Contents
An extended table of contents is provided in the last pages of this work. In the
digital version of this book, links help navigation.

Abstract

I

Table of Contents

II

Summary
English

VII

Samenvatting
Dutch

XXI

Chapter 1
Introduction

1

1.1. Relevance.................................................................................................2
1.2. State of the Art and Knowledge Gaps .....................................................4
1.3. Research Objective ..................................................................................8
1.4. Research Methodology ............................................................................9

Chapter 2
Damage Metric for Masonry Cracking

13

2.1. Background and Introduction ................................................................15
2.2. The Ψ Damage Parameter .....................................................................28
2.3. Utilisation: Examples of Application of Ψ ..............................................41
2.4. Discussion ..............................................................................................47
2.5. Conclusions about Ψ, ∆Ψ, Ψ0 ...............................................................51

Chapter 3
Experiments to Characterise Cracks

53

3.1. Definition of Experiments to Investigate Light Damage........................55
3.2. Results from Experiments on Walls and Spandrels ................................73

4.2. Overview of Actions causing Damage to Masonry Buildings ..............113
4.3. Calibrating Crack Behaviour from Experiments into FEM Models ......117
4.4. Modelling Damage: Shrinkage, Settlements, and Vibrations ..............139
4.5. Conclusions: Modelling and Calibration..............................................147

Chapter 5
Fragility

149

5.1. Introduction .........................................................................................150
5.2. Extrapolation to Non-Linear Dynamic Analyses ..................................152
5.3. Regression of Damage Function from FEM Results.............................167
5.4. Fragility Curves for Seismic Vibrations.................................................178
5.5. Fragility Curves for Settlements from Soil Curvatures .........................191
5.6. Conclusions: Probability of Damage and Aggravation ........................206

Chapter 6
Hastening: Damage Accumulation Function

209

6.1. Analysis of Repetition Effect in Experiments .......................................212
6.2. Damage Accumulation due to Repetition in FEM Models ..................218
6.3. Damage Accumulation Function (DAF) ...............................................229
6.4. Concept of Damage Hastening ...........................................................248

Chapter 7
Conclusions and Outlook

257

7.1. Answers and Conclusions ....................................................................258
7.2. Relevance and Contributions ...............................................................265
7.3. Limitations - Restrictions of the Scope ................................................268

Summary
Chapter 1
Chapter 2

4.1. Hazards and Multi-hazards ...................................................................109

Chapter 3

107

Chapter 4

Chapter 4
Damaging (Multi)Hazards and Modelling their Effects

Chapter 5

3.4. Conclusions: Experiments to Understand Crack Behaviour.................105

Chapter 6

3.3. Crack-Based Drift Limits from Experimental Results ..............................93

Chapter 7

III

Appendices

Table of Contents

Summary
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5

Table of Contents

7.4. Recommendations for Further Study ...................................................271
7.5. Outlook ................................................................................................275

List of Publications

277

Bibliography

281

Appendix A
Overview of Related Work

i

Appendix B
Ψ Damage Parameter

xxix

Appendix C
Supervised MSc Projects

xxxv

Appendix D
Glossary

xxxix

Appendix E
Loppersum Visit

xliii

Appendix F
Dataset

xlix

li

Chapter 7

Appendix G
Tool for Crack Tracking
Curriculum Vitæ

lxvii

Propositions

lxix

Appendices

Chapter 6

IV

Acknowledgements

lxxi

Extended Table of Contents

lxxvi

Chapter 7

Chapter 6

Chapter 5

Chapter 4

Chapter 3

Chapter 2

Chapter 1

Summary

V

Appendices

Table of Contents

Summary

Summary
English
Unreinforced masonry is ubiquitous in the Netherlands. Much of both housing
and historical infrastructure sport a variety of masonry patterns with units of
fired-clay brick and lime-based or cementitious mortars. In modern housing,
structural walls and outer veneers, typically forming a cavity wall, are masonry,
with calcium-silicate units supporting reinforced concrete floors. Older
buildings, with double-wythe walls, are even founded on plain masonry
footings. Unreinforced masonry, however, with limited tensile strength, is
susceptible to damage induced by vibrations. Moreover, soft soils and shallow
footings combined, are likely to result in building settlements also leading to
tensile stresses.
In the north of the Netherlands, gas extraction has led to induced seismicity
and deep subsidence. These induced earthquakes in turn, have produced
vibrations with the potential to damage buildings, especially those of
unreinforced masonry, while subsidence could (indirectly) have lead to
settlements. The earthquakes, considered light by international standards, have
been occurring repeatedly since the early nineties. Towards the centre of the
affected regions, peak-ground-velocities of 5 mm/s have been exceeded
several times per year.
How much damage to masonry can be expected from a light earthquake
vibration? And, do the repeated events lead to an accumulation of damage?
Older structures have been subjected to other causes of damage over the
years and might display pre-existing damage. Does this initial condition affect
the earthquake-induced damage to be expected? From a probabilistic
perspective, how far away from the epicentres is this vibration-induced damage
unlikely?
Five Steps within a Physical Approach
This work strived to answer these questions in an objective manner. For that
purpose, a physical approach was followed to investigate the effect of
earthquakes on masonry. Such an approach comprises understanding the

VIII

Summary

processes that cause damage and the factors that affect it. In this work, it
includes five steps: first, the objective definition of damage; second, the
analysis of experiments to investigate the initiation and propagation of cracks
in masonry; third, numerical models to replicate the cracking behaviour and
(fourth) to evaluate the effects of the vibrations. Finally, the fifth step derives
relationships between damage and parameters that affect its appearance and
development; it includes the probabilistic aspects of damage (progression) and
the effect of repetition.
Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Definition of
Crack-based
Damage

Experiments
for cracking
in Masonry

Calibration of
Models

Extrapolation
with Models

Probabilistic
Modelling of
Fragility

Figure 1.3. Steps in the methodology of this work.

Step 1: Define how to Measure Crack-Based Damage
First, it was paramount to define ‘damage’ in the relevant context of masonry
and (light) earthquakes. When the tensile strength of masonry is exceeded, a
fracture or crack will appear. As this crack widens, it becomes visible. A wide
crack will upset the aesthetic quality of the masonry; it can also affect the
perception of safety of the building’s users and can compromise the
watertightness of a structure leading to potentially more damage. Hence, to
quantify damage, a measure was devised which included the width and length
of the cracks and the number of cracks present.
This continuous damage parameter, called Ψ, was tuned against existing
damage scales, the visibility of the damage, and its cost of repair. Unlike
existing scales, the mathematical formulation for Ψ guarantees that evaluating
damage leads objectively to the same value regardless of the inspector or
measuring method. Moreover, a single number makes it easy to evaluate an
increase in damage ∆Ψ, or the effect of an initial condition, Ψ0. The thresholds
set for Ψ mean that a value of Ψ≥1 represents visible damage (with a crack
width of 0.1 mm) while an increase in damage of ∆Ψ≥0.2 depicts a noticeable
increase. Furthermore, the probability of damage, p(Ψ≥1), or of noticeable
increases in damage p(∆Ψ≥0.2), for various thresholds, can be represented.
This continuous scale becomes widely applicable to evaluate the effect of
earthquake vibrations in existing masonry structures, laboratory experiments,
and numerical models.

IX

Step 2: Look at Cracking in Experiments with Masonry
The experiments to evaluate crack development focused on fired-clay brick
masonry and consisted, in addition to companion tests to obtain the
mechanical properties of masonry, of two types of tests: spandrels (1.5x0.5m)
and walls (3x2.7m), both at full scale. Tests on calcium-silicate masonry were
also conducted. To assess the initiation and propagation of cracks in these
tests, two important aspects were developed. First, a testing protocol which
would actually allow observing crack formation and crack development.
Second, a measuring system which could detect and monitor the progression
of cracks in brick masonry.
Protocols to trigger Light Damage
For the former, three protocols were formulated, two for the wall and one for
the spandrels. The spandrel tests mimic a four-point bending test with
counterweights located opposite to two hydraulic jacks. These allow for
repetition, or one-way cyclic loading. Bending causes a vertical crack in the
centre of most specimens. Consequently, the tests were controlled on the
width at the mouth of this crack. The crack width was monotonically increased
until about 2 millimetres when most specimens had failed. Failure, however,
depended on the type of crack that formed. The notion of a vertical crack
actually represents a toothed crack zigzagging through head and bed joints;
opening of the head joints and sliding at the bed joints allows for a large
deformation capacity. Based on these monotonic tests, a repetitive protocol
was conceived. An initial step consisted of a crack width of 0.05 mm which was
repeated several times, followed by steps with increments of 0.05 mm. The
number of repetitions in each step was varied among tests to find a certain
convergence. The force required to enforce a specific crack width decreased
with each repetition and stabilised asymptotically after about 30 repetitions.
Hence, most tests were conducted with a protocol of 3 steps, of 30 repetitions
each, at 0.05, 0.1 and 0.15 mm followed by a monotonic increase until failure.
This allowed to evaluate the propagation of the cracks and the degradation of
the force.
For the walls, which were tested in-plane with an enforced horizontal drift, the
protocols also applied a cyclic behaviour derived from a monotonic test. In this
case, the first test was stopped when a crack of 0.1 mm was observed. The
corresponding drift was then repeated in a one-way cyclic step with 30
repetitions. Subsequently, this drift was increased by 25% for the following
step. Five steps, followed by at least six steps with a two-way cyclic drift, were
enforced. The values of drift varied between 0.1‰ and 1‰. This was denoted
as the light-damage protocol. The various cycles, enforced at identical

Summary

Summary

X

Summary

displacements, were viewed as several repeated earthquake records. A second
loading protocol, called the asymmetric light damage protocol, consisted of
cycles where the drift achieved in one direction was twice as large as in the
other direction. This mimicked the fact that earthquake records are seldom
symmetric. Walls, for which shear-based failure was expected, were tested with
this protocol.
Photogrammetry to Capture Cracks
To observe cracks, a photogrammetry-based solution was employed. Digital
image correlation (DIC) was improved by maximising the resolution at which
displacements could be precisely measured. This consisted of a custom speckle
pattern painted on the masonry with random shapes of 2-4 pixels spaced a
similar distance and a high-resolution camera of 51 Mpx. A sharp lens,
stopped down to f/8 and paired with a flash firing at 1/63000 of a second,
produced crisp and high-contrast images. Additionally, a correlation algorithm
was formulated, focused on determining the displacements of each virtual
node individually. This allowed a more precise measurement of displacement
discontinuities, or cracks, on the walls and spandrels, as traditionally, software is
optimised to measure strains. The program developed could thus detect cracks
on walls already at 0.02 mm in width and track their progression over the
various steps and repetitions.

Figure I.1. Automatically identified cracks from the displacement field captured by DIC
of a fired-clay brick wall without opening. Ψ=2.1. Most cracks follow the bed and head
joints of the masonry.

XI

Drift Limits for Light Damage
Results interpreted from the masonry wall experiments relate crack metrics
from DIC to in-plane wall drift at each measurement instance. High correlations
were identified between drift and damage, alongside influences from other
relevant parameters in the experiments such as wall type, material, boundary
conditions, and test progression.
Repeated drift instances led to slightly increased damage. Cantilever-bound
walls tolerated more drift before similar crack damage compared to doubleclamped ones. Shear walls and calcium-silicate (CaSi) walls exhibited more
damage than walls with openings and fired-clay brick walls, respectively.
Simplified models showed CaSi's upper drift limit for light damage was 40%
lower than fired-clay’s 0.5%. Noticeable light damage begins at 0.5‰ and
0.6‰ drift for CaSi and clay, with corresponding crack widths of 1 mm. These
thresholds help in designing for limited significant damage. For older or
repeatedly loaded structures and shear walls, a 10% reduced drift value is
recommended.
Cracks Propagate from Corners
It was observed that cracks mostly initiate from the corners of openings or at
the lateral edges of walls. In the case of walls without openings, body cracks
may also manifest. Most observed cracks were either horizontal or step-wise
diagonal, coalescing into a single crack from being spread over multiple joints
initially. The experiments show how the width and length of cracks grow
simultaneously, with a notable observation that cracks appear (in DIC) even
before they become visible to the eye, suggesting the presence of 'invisible'
cracks that could potentially propagate if conditions vary. Different types of
cracks, whether horizontal, diagonal, vertical, tapered, or uniform, exhibit
similar aggravation under increased loading. Some invisible cracks unload as
other cracks appear and ultimately never become visible.
Calcium-silicate brick masonry seems more brittle than fired-clay brick,
especially when looking at vertical cracks developing in the spandrels. In this
case, the cracks, which zigzag around head and bed joints of fired-bricks, split
the calcium-silicate units vertically.
Repetition affects Propagation
Moreover, repetition affects crack propagation, where identical loading
conditions lead to measurable but consistent increases in crack width and
length. Also, the force required to obtain identical drifts would degrade by
about 10% between the first and the last repetition of a step.

Summary

Summary

XII

Summary

Step 3: Calibrate Models to Experiments
In collaboration with other authors, computational models were developed to
reproduce the behaviour observed in the experiments. In contrast to typical
calibration strategies that focus on reproducing the stiffness, strength and
ultimate capacity of the specimens, the objective was to include crack patterns
and propagation. Finite-element-method models with plane-stress elements
using the Engineering Masonry Model in Diana FEA, were successful in
replicating the experimental behaviour once the material parameters were
tuned. Parameters such as the Young’s moduli, tensile strength and fracture
energy were highlighted as most influential in guaranteeing a successful
calibration.
The EMM is orthotropic and includes both horizontal and vertical tensile
softening, with shear softening, too. In addition, unloading is secant for
tension, while elastic for shear. The crack orientations are pre-fixed, unlike a
rotating total strain model. These characteristics make it ideally suited to model
masonry which consists of units, bed- and head-joints in a homogenised
model. Other issues like mesh objectivity and convergence were explored.
While the wall models were sufficiently accurate, computational constraints
made it difficult to model as many cycles as were tested experimentally.
Instead, only three cycles in every step were included. This was enough to
observe some degradation as seen experimentally and the effect stabilised
after three cycles. In future studies, the material model could be further refined
to include the cyclic degradation observed.
Moreover, micro-models, where the bricks and mortar joints are modelled
independently, were also considered. These produced more accurate results in
terms of crack patterns, but were computationally expensive. Ultimately, for the
large number of models required, the continuum model using the EEM, was
selected.
Step 4: Extrapolate Models to Initial Condition + Seismic Vibrations
The boundary of the models that include accurate crack initiation and
propagation behaviour, validated against the experiments on masonry walls
and spandrels, are adjusted to analyse the effect of settlements and of
earthquake vibrations. These are the extrapolated models. At the top of the
model of the walls, a mass representing the dynamic effect of the floor and
roof, is attached. At the bottom of the model, an interface to account for the
soil-structure interaction at the foundation is included. Finally, at the walls’
sides, vertical springs are positioned to consider the influence of the walls
transversal to the main wall studied. As a first load, a vertical displacement is

XIII

applied at the bottom of the interface representing a loss of support consistent
with a settlement shape. This causes the wall to settle and develop cracks
compatible with those found in buildings affected by settlement damage. The
intensity of the settlement is adjusted so as to generate various initial values of
Ψ, denoted as Ψ0; a case without settlement damage, Ψ0=0, is also
contemplated. As second load, an acceleration time history is applied at the
bottom of the wall after locking the tangential stiffness of the soil-interface.
Record-to-record Variability
Multiple acceleration signals were investigated. Two correspond to the
earthquake of Zeerijp of 2018 and two were recorded during the earthquake of
Westerwijtwerd in 2019. One record of each event was registered nearby the
epicentre (≈3km) and the other farther away (≈8km). The goal was to
investigate the influence of near and far events which differ in their frequency
content, effective cycles and relationship between horizontal and vertical
components. Additionally, the records were scaled to various levels of PGV
varying from 2 mm/s until 100 mm/s. Also, identical records were repeated in
the same analysis to investigate the influence of repeated events.
Many Variations in Parameters
The parameters related to initial damage Ψ0 and to the earthquake load
applied (PGV, repetition, record type) were not the only ones varied to
investigate their relationship to damage. Two geometries for the wall were
analysed, one with an opening for a window and one without. Similarly, two soil
types, reflected in the soil-structure interface, were observed. Additionally,
three sets of material parameters were included. These correspond to a weak
masonry, standard, and strong masonry and vary the Young’s moduli, tensile
and shear strengths and fracture energies.
Relationship between Parameters and Damage
Key observations about the influence on damage by each of these parameters
based on thousands of the extrapolated wall models is described next:
For the two wall geometries, flexible walls, referred to as façade A with a
window opening, typically sustain more damage compared to the more rigid
façade B, especially under near-type earthquake conditions. This is attributed
to the flexible wall's vulnerability to stress concentrations at window corners,
which facilitate the initiation of cracks.
Soil type also plays a pivotal role in the extent of damage a structure
undergoes during an earthquake. Buildings on softer soil (type B) require larger
deformations to reach the same level of damage as those on stiffer soil (type

Summary

Summary

XIV

Summary

A). This difference is due to the stiffer soil causing sharper wall curvatures and
higher stress levels, resulting in more concentrated and severe damage.
The distance to the earthquake’s epicentre to the structure significantly
influences damage outcomes as well. Near-field motions tend to propagate
existing cracks, while far-field motions primarily widen them, which makes
damage more visible. This difference is particularly notable between the two
wall types under similar seismic conditions, highlighting the nuanced
interactions between structural features and earthquake dynamics.
Additionally, the initial state of damage, or pre-damage, within a structure
before an earthquake critically affects the severity of damage from subsequent
seismic events. Structures with higher levels of pre-damage tend to show more
significant overall damage after an earthquake, although the incremental
damage decreases with increased pre-damage levels.
Material properties of the façade also influence the damage patterns. Weaker
materials are less capable of resisting tensile and shear stresses, resulting in
more extensive damage under identical seismic conditions compared to
stronger materials. This is evident in the varied crack patterns and damage
distributions observed across different material configurations.
The aggravating effect of multiple earthquakes is another important factor.
Structures subjected to repeated seismic events show progressively higher
damage levels, though the rate of increase is relatively modest with each
additional event. This finding underscores the importance of considering the
repetition of earthquakes when assessing structural resilience.
Lastly, the intensity of the earthquake, measured by PGV, directly correlates
with the degree of damage. Higher PGVs consistently result in more severe
damage, demonstrating a clear relationship between earthquake intensity and
structural impact. While this relationship was expected, it has now been
quantified.
Capturing these Relationships into a Model
The influence of each parameter can be captured in a surrogate model. Two
types of models were explored. First, a ‘reasoned’ model where the observed
trends are coded into specific functions such as power laws or logistic
relationships. Then, a fitting procedure is used to obtain the coefficients in the
functions. Second, a supervised machine learning model was trained on the
data. The best-performing machine learning model was a neural network.
However, the machine learning models were found to generalise poorly and
failed to capture physical relationships. The reasoned model, which enforces

XV

such relationships, like higher damage for higher PGV, was ultimately selected
as the surrogate model to use for the next step. An uncertainty parameter was
included to account for the model error and for other uncertainties in the FE
modelling strategy.
Step 5: Assign Distributions to the Parameters and Determine the
Probability of Damage
The various parameters listed can be represented with a probabilistic
distribution. For example, experiments on the tensile strength of masonry, one
of the most influential parameters in the calibration of the models, show that it
is normally distributed with a deviation of 30%. For the models, the same
distribution is assigned. The distance to the epicentre is correlated to the PGV;
higher PGVs are more likely to originate from a nearby epicentre. The soil type
followed a uniform distributions according to statistics about the soils found in
the Groningen region. In this manner, all the parameters except PGV and Ψ0,
which were independently assessed, could be sampled from distributions.
Then, using the surrogate model, a Monte Carlo simulation was run. For a
given PGV and initial damage, the probability of exceeding certain values of Ψ
were computed. These fragility curves reveal for instance that fired-clay brick
walls with no visible pre-damage (Ψ0=0) had a 5% chance of light damage
(Ψ≥1) at a PGV of 10 mm/s, a probability that rose to 20% if the walls had
undetectable pre-existing damage (Ψ0=0.5); at a lower PGV, the probability of
damage is also lower.
Fragility Curves can become Maps
The fragility curves can be convoluted with a distribution of PGV for any given
location resulting in a probability of damage for a given event. Moreover, if at a
specific location the maximum PGV from various events is determined, one can
obtain the maximum probability of damage for masonry buildings at that
location. This is put together into a map, depicted in Figure 5.4.5. In this case,
an initial damage of Ψ0=1 is assumed, corresponding to just visible cracks of
0.1mm; and, an increase in damage of ∆Ψ=0.5, representing a noticeable
increase in damage, is considered. The map shows that for a relatively large
region in the north of the buffer zone of the Groningen gas field, the
probability of this noticeable increase in light damage is 1 in 100 (or 1%). The
entirety of the buffer zone, six kilometres from the edges of the gas fields, and
a large portion outside it, is subjected to a probability of 1‰. This is a very
small probability when discussing cracks pertaining to light damage. If ten
thousand buildings are considered, 10 buildings would be expected (p=50%)
to show this damage aggravation of ∆Ψ=0.5. The probability of exceeding

Summary

Summary

XVI

Summary

Damage State 1 (Ψ>2.5), however, is about 0.1‰ for the entirety of the buffer
zone.

Figure 5.4.5. Probability map for the historical maximum PGV convoluted with masonry
wall fragility. The case of a ∆Ψ of 0.5 for an initial condition of just visible damage is
exemplified. See “Limitations” for the applicability of this map. The contours are
constrained by the domain of the model.

The Effect of Repetition in the Experiments
The experiments were conducted with repeated, identical cycles. It was
observed that repeated displacements lead to a reduction in the force required
to achieve the same displacement, a phenomenon termed "force
degradation". This was observed both in walls and spandrels. It was found that
after about thirty repetitions, the amount of force degradation stabilised.
Different testing protocols, including one-way and two-way cyclic
displacements, showed that the effect of force degradation was consistent,
especially after thirty repetitions. If a direction was damaged before, negligible
degradation occurred when testing that displacement again. The findings
suggest that both the magnitude and direction of the load affect the
degradation behaviour. Moreover, along with force degradation, repeated
displacements also caused observable increases in damage, notably in the

XVII

form of crack propagation. This indicates that not only does the force required
to move the walls and spandrels decrease, but also that cracks grow in width
and length with each repetition.
The Effect of Repetition in the Models
The FE models were also subjected to repeated records. In most cases, records
with identical PGVs were applied (homogeneous sequences); in other cases, a
heterogeneous sequence was evaluated. The assessment of Ψ from these timehistory analyses revealed that repeated events do lead to an accumulation in
damage, albeit in small quantities. Moreover, vibrations of lower intensity than
previous vibrations increase damage negligibly, while vibrations of similar or
larger intensity than previous vibrations may increase damage by 10%, though
this is dependent on the intensity of the vibrations and the number of
repetitions. For a second vibration of 10 mm/s for example, damage is
expected to increase by 6%. The limited number of models and variations, and
lack of comparison field data, should be further expanded to validate these
model-based observations.
Damage Accumulation Function (DAF)
The observations drawn from experiments and models evaluating repetition
were incorporated into a function to evaluate any sequence of PGV so as is
expected from a real history of earthquake events. The DAF was built on top of
the surrogate model to predict Ψ. In this manner, the DAF outputs a
probabilistic distribution for Ψ for every PGV in the sequence and computes
the final damage aggravation for an initial Ψ0. The function uses two
components, one for events with a similar PGV as previous events, and another
for events with a PGV that is larger than earlier events. The latter leads to a
larger increase in damage. The DAF was then validated against the model
results and the experimental observations. Ultimately, the DAF is used to
determine the expected damage and its probability for masonry buildings in
the region of Groningen subjected to decades of repeated earthquakes.
Using the DAF in contrast to Single Fragility Curves
To evaluate the contribution of considering the accumulation of damage with
the DAF, a comparison is drawn against the maps produced with the maximum
PGV. First, the shape of the contours from a single event is mostly circular as
the propagation in the Ground Motion Prediction Equations (GMPEs) depends
on the distance to the epicentre. For the DAF, multiple events are considered
with their own epicentres which leads to an irregular shape. Second, the outer
probability contours from the single event encircle slightly smaller regions. This

Summary

Summary

XVIII

Summary

means that considering the accumulated effect of multiple events leads to
higher probabilities. Third, the contours towards the centre of the region are
much larger for the DAF case. This is because of the larger number of events
and the fact that their epicentres are spread out thus modifying the shape of
the contours.
For a specific location, the DAF can lead to a significant influence. This is the
case for places close to the centre of the Groningen region but relatively far
from the specific event of Huizinge (largest recorded magnitude). In Delfzijl, for
instance, the probability of displaying visible damage is less than 1% in the
case of Huizinge, but considering the entire history of events, this probability
rises to 10%. However, the probability of exceeding Ψ≥2.5 is virtually
unaffected regardless of the initial damage condition. For this case, the single,
large event plays a more important role than the accumulated effect of multiple
smaller events. The repeated smaller events, regardless of how many are
accumulated, don’t have the capacity to cause a structure to exceed light
damage (Ψ≥2.5).
Contributions in Comparison to Literature
In comparison to literature, this bottom-up approach presents several
contributions. Three types of reference studies can be identified: First,
empirical analyses, which have difficulty isolating the origin of the reported
damage and thus cannot draw quantitative conclusions about the effects of
earthquake or repetition. Second, extrapolative curves, which, on the basis of
ULS or a pushover curve, infer the behaviour or limits for light damage. These
cannot express clear limits for visible damage or its propagation. Nonetheless,
many of these fragility curves fall within the thresholds established in this work.
Third, studies which do look at crack formation but where damage is
insufficiently quantified; these rarely take the step to calibrate models and
employ them to investigate the effect of earthquakes. In this context, the
present work adds upon these shortages.
Concluding Remarks
Indeed, this project was embarked on to quantify the probability of light
damage to masonry structures due to repeated seismic vibrations while
considering an initial damage condition. The methodology proposed,
considering experiments to validate numerical models, and models to assess
the influence of the loads on crack-based damage, has been successful in
providing an approach with which to quantify damage.
Additionally, important observations have been made about the effect of
earthquakes. For example, repeated events will increase damage by about

XIX

10% depending on the intensity of the PGV. Moreover, existing damage will be
aggravated, though for the majority of events, PGVs larger than 10 mm/s are
usually required to produce a noticeable increase in damage. In general, most
fired-clay brick masonry structures in the epicentre of the Groningen seismic
region will have developed visible damage, with cracks of at least 0.1 mm in
width, over the period of 2000-2020. For the rest of the buffer zone of the gas
field, the probability of such damage is at least 1‰; however, if some initial, yet
invisible, damage was present, this probability increases ten fold. Only a
compact area reaches a small probability of 1% of exceeding serviceability
damage with DS1, even if the structures begun with visible initial damage.
Limitations
While the methodology comprised experiments and models, a third aspect
should. Be added: that of monitoring. The findings should be validated against
field data. However, reliable monitoring over such an extensive time frame is
difficult and expensive and cannot guarantee that all intertwined damage
causes are disentangled. Other alternatives should be contemplated to
validate these results in the future.
Other limitations of the approach must also be highlighted. First, walls are used
as proxy for masonry buildings. The effect of 3D buildings and more complex
façades must still be further studied; preliminary results show good agreement.
Secondly, damage is considered for in-plane effects and single-wythe walls.
Out-of-plane effects are predicted to be less relevant for light damage, but the
progression of cracks in double-wythe walls could be different. Thirdly, the
conclusions presented here are valid for fired-clay brick masonry. Other
materials will behave differently. Calcium-silicate brick has also been explored
in experiments but its fragility is yet to be thoroughly evaluated. Fourthly, the
quasi-static experiments have been used to validate models extrapolated to
dynamic loading. Additional experiments with dynamic loading should be
studied barring the increased complexity of loading, boundaries and crack
monitoring possibilities during dynamic testing. Finally, the degradation
observed at the masonry material level is not fully represented in the current
numerical models; a cyclic degradation effect for the EMM would make these
models more accurate.
Outlook: Relevance of Light Damage in the Future
Understanding light damage will become even more relevant in the future as
climate change leads to more extreme weather events, to changes in the soil
and new energy requirements like geothermal energy.

Summary

Summary

XX

Summary

Extreme weather events like stronger storms, droughts, heavy rainfall, and
heatwaves can cause structural damages—from roof and wall damages to soilinduced settlements. Additionally, the risk of floods and necessary
underground interventions for climate mitigation, such as carbon storage, pose
new challenges to building resilience.
The shift from fossil fuels to renewables affects buildings, too. Geothermal
drilling and underground energy storage may induce subsidence similar to
(gas) mining. Also, as homeowners adopt new energy technologies and retrofit
buildings, the structural integrity could be compromised if not managed
properly, leading to damage.
In the Netherlands, poor communication and late policy implementation on the
effects of gas extraction-induced seismicity led to a strong public backlash and
risk aversion. The perceived risks, although minor, are magnified by uncertainty
and lack of clear policies, similar to the opposition seen with nuclear energy.
The future requires building a society that accepts and manages these risks
effectively. With climate change posing increased threats, clear policies are
necessary to ensure fair and proactive handling of building-related issues and
other climate-related risks. This is only possible with a clear understanding of
the relationship between hazards and damage.

Summary

Samenvatting
Dutch
In Nederland en wereldwijd komt ongewapend metselwerk veelvuldig voor,
zowel in woonhuizen als in historische bouwwerken. Deze constructies bestaan
uit baksteen verbonden door kalkhoudende of cement-mortels in een
verscheidenheid aan metselwerkverbanden. Moderne woningen zijn vaak
uitgerust met dragende muren en gevelbekledingen die samen een
spouwmuur vormen. Dragende muren bestaan vaak uit kalkzandsteenmetselwerk op betonnen funderingen en ondersteunen gewapende betonnen
vloeren. Oudere gebouwen hebben vaak steensmuren op metselwerkfunderingen. Ongewapend metselwerk, met beperkte treksterkte, blijkt
bijzonder gevoelig voor schade veroorzaakt door trillingen. Daarnaast zijn de
zachte bodem en de ondiepe funderingen op staal, gevoelig voor
ongelijkmatige zetting die op hun beurt trek- en buigspanningen en daarmee
schade veroorzaken in het metselwerk.
Sinds begin jaren negentig heeft de gaswinning in het noorden van Nederland
geleid tot geïnduceerde seismiciteit en significante bodemdalingen. Deze door
menselijke activiteit veroorzaakte aardbevingen, met vanuit internationaal
perspectief relatief beperkte intensiteit, veroorzaken trillingen die potentieel
schadelijk zijn voor gebouwen, vooral voor die van ongewapend metselwerk. In
het centrum van de getroffen regio's zijn piek grondsnelheden (PGV) van 5
mm/s meerdere keren per jaar overschreden.
Dit roept belangrijke vragen op: Hoeveel schade aan metselwerk door een
lichte aardbeving kan men verwachten? En leiden herhaalde trillingen tot een
cumulatie van schade? Vooral oudere constructies die mogelijk al schade
hebben opgelopen door andere oorzaken, kunnen vatbaarder zijn voor nieuwe
schade. Hoe beïnvloedt een initieel, reeds aanwezige voorschade de verdere
schade die door aardbevingen wordt veroorzaakt? Daarnaast is het vanuit een
probabilistisch perspectief ook belangrijk om te bepalen op welke afstand deze
door trillingen geïnduceerde schade onwaarschijnlijk wordt.

XXII

Samenvatting

Vijf Stappen binnen een Fysisch-Gebaseerde Aanpak
Dit onderzoek heeft als doel gesteld om op een objectieve manier de effecten
van aardbevingen op metselwerk te evalueren. Daartoe is een systematische
fysisch gebaseerde aanpak gehanteerd die zowel de processen die schade
veroorzaken als de beïnvloedende factoren meeneemt. Deze aanpak bestaat
uit vijf gedetailleerde stappen. Ten eerste, het is essentieel om te beginnen
met een heldere en objectieve definitie van het begrip schade binnen de
context van metselwerk en lichte aardbevingen. Wanneer de treksterkte van
metselwerk wordt overschreden, leidt dit tot het ontstaan van scheuren. Deze
scheuren worden wijder en langer en daarmee zichtbaarder naarmate de
schade toeneemt, wat de esthetische kwaliteit en constructieve integriteit van
het metselwerk kan aantasten. De tweede stap omvat het onderzoeken van de
initiatie en de voortplanting van scheuren in metselwerk door middel van
gecontroleerde laboratorium experimenten. Het doel is om een diepgaand
inzicht te krijgen in hoe scheuren ontstaan en zich uitbreiden in verschillende
proefstukken onder verschillende belastingsomstandigheden. Deze proeven
valideren numerieke modellen die het mogelijk maken om het gedrag van
scheuren na te bootsen en te analyseren hoe trillingen invloed hebben op
metselwerk. Deze modellen helpen bij het voorspellen van schade onder
variërende omstandigheden die in de praktijk kunnen voorkomen. In de vierde
stap worden de numerieke modellen gebruikt om de effecten van trillingen
veroorzaakt door aardbevingen op het metselwerk te evalueren. Dit helpt bij
het vaststellen van de kwetsbaarheid van metselwerk-gebouwen onder
seismische belasting. De laatste stap leidt tot het vaststellen van relaties tussen
de waargenomen schade en verschillende invloedsfactoren. Deze stap omvat
ook het onderzoeken van probabilistische aspecten van schadevoortgang
inclusief het effect van herhaalde aardbevingen en de cumulatie van bevingen
met voorschade.
Stap 1

Definitie van
Scheurgebaseerde
Schade

Stap 2

Experimenten
voor
Scheurvorming
in Metselwerk

Stap 3

Stap 4

Stap 5

Kalibratie van
Numerieke
Modellen

Extrapolatie
met
Modellen

Probabilistische
Modellering van
Kwestbaarheid

Figuur 1.3. Stappen in de methodologie van dit werk.

Stap 1: Definitie van Scheur-gebaseerde Schadeschaal
Bij het beoordelen van de impact van lichte aardbevingen op metselwerk is
een nauwkeurige definitie van 'schade' cruciaal. Scheuren ontstaat wanneer de
treksterkte overschreden wordt, resulterend in de vorming van schade.

XXIII

Naarmate deze scheuren wijder worden, worden ze zichtbaar en beginnen ze
invloed uit te oefenen op zowel de esthetische kwaliteit als de constructieve
samenhang van het gebouw. Wijde scheuren kunnen de veiligheidsperceptie
van gebruikers ondermijnen en de waterdichtheid van de constructie
aantasten, wat leidt tot verdere schade.
Om schade kwantitatief te beoordelen, is een continue schadeparameter
ontwikkeld, aangeduid als Ψ. Deze parameter representeert het aantal
scheuren, de wijdte en de lengte ervan in éen getal. De parameter is
afgestemd op bestaande schadeschalen en neemt zichtbaarheid van de
schade en reparatiekosten in overweging. In tegenstelling tot andere
schadeschalen, zorgt de wiskundige formulering van Ψ voor een objectieve
schadebeoordeling die consistent is ongeacht de inspecteur of meetmethode.
Ψ maakt het mogelijk om zowel de aanwezige schade als de verandering of
verergering van schade (∆Ψ) ten opzichte van een initiële schade (Ψ0) te
kwantificeren. De drempelwaarden zijn ingesteld zodat een Ψ-waarde van Ψ≥1
net voor het blote oog zichtbare schade vertegenwoordigt (scheurwijdte van
0,1 mm) als drempel geldt. Een verergering van schade met een waarde van
∆Ψ≥0,2 duidt op een waarneembare toename. Daarnaast kan de kans op
schade, p(Ψ≥1), voor verschillende drempels worden berekend. Deze
schaalaanpak maakt het mogelijk om de effecten van belastingen zoals
trillingen en zettingen op metselwerk in bestaande gebouwen,
laboratoriumexperimenten en numerieke modellen systematisch te evalueren.
Stap 2: Blik op Scheurvorming in Experimenten op Metselwerk
Deze stap van het onderzoek richtte zich op het evalueren van scheurvorming
in baksteenmetselwerk door middel van experimenten. Deze experimenten
omvatten twee hoofdtypen: buigproeven op borstweringen (spandrels), met
een afmeting van 1,5 bij 0,5 meter, en schuifproeven op wanden van 3 bij 2,7
meter. Daarnaast werden begeleidende proeven op kleinere monsters
uitgevoerd om de mechanische eigenschappen van het metselwerk vast te
stellen. Om de initiatie en voortplanting van scheuren effectief te kunnen
beoordelen, zijn twee cruciale aspecten ontwikkeld binnen het experimentele
protocol:
Ten eerste, het testprotocol is specifiek ontworpen om de observatie van zowel
de initiële scheurvorming als de verdere ontwikkeling van deze scheuren te
faciliteren. Dit protocol speelt een essentiële rol in het nauwkeurig
documenteren van hoe scheuren ontstaan en hoe ze zich uitbreiden onder
verschillende belastingen. Ten tweede, een geavanceerd meetsysteem werd
ingezet om de progressie van scheuren in het baksteenmetselwerk te

Summary

Samenvatting

XXIV

Samenvatting

detecteren en te monitoren. Dit systeem stelt onderzoekers in staat om
nauwkeurige en continue data te verzamelen over het verloop van de
scheurvorming in de tijd, wat cruciaal is voor het analyseren van de respons van
het metselwerk op seismische belastingen. Deze gecombineerde benadering
van zowel een gestructureerd testprotocol als een geavanceerd meetsysteem
zorgt ervoor dat de experimentele analyse van scheurvorming in metselwerk
gedetailleerd en betrouwbaar is.
Protocollen om Lichte Schade te Genereren
De methodiek om lichte schade in metselwerk te genereren voor dit onderzoek
bestond uit het toepassen van diverse specifiek ontworpen protocollen voor
zowel de wanden als de borstweringen.
Borstweringen werden onderworpen aan een vierpunts buigproef met behulp
van contragewichten en twee hydraulische krikken om eenzijdige cyclische
belasting te realiseren. Deze configuratie induceerde verticale scheuren in het
midden van de meeste proefstukken, waarbij tijdens de test het verloop in
scheurwijdte nauwkeurig werd gevolgd. De wijdte aan de mond van de scheur
werd geleidelijk verhoogd tot ongeveer 2 millimeter, het punt waarop de
meeste proefstukken faalden. Dit falen was afhankelijk van de verbindingsvorm
van de scheur die meestal vertand- en zigzaggend door stoot- en lintvoegen
liep, en soms diagonal getrapt. Dit resulteerde in aanzienlijke vervormingscapaciteit door het openen van de stootvoegen en het afschuiven langs de
lintvoegen. Op basis van deze initiële proven werd een repeterend
testprotocol ontwikkeld waarbij een initiële scheurwijdte van 0,05 mm
meerdere keren werd herhaald, met incrementele stappen van 0,05 mm. Het
aantal herhalingen per stap varieerde om een bepaalde convergentie in de
resultaten te bereiken. De benodigde kracht om een specifieke scheurwijdte te
induceren nam af bij elke herhaling en stabiliseerde na ongeveer 30 cycli. De
meeste tests volgden een drie-staps protocol van 30 herhalingen bij 0,05, 0,1
en 0,15 mm, gevolgd door een continue toename tot falen, waardoor de
voortplanting van scheuren en degradatie van de krachtcapaciteit kon worden
beoordeeld.
De muren werden vertical voorbelast en vervolgens in het vlak getest met een
opgelegde horizontale verplaatsing. Hier werden protocollen toegepast
waarbij het cyclisch deel werd bepaald na een monotone aanloopfase. De
aanloop-test werd gestopt zodra een scheur van 0,1 mm werd waargenomen,
waarna de bijbehorende verplaatsing cyclisch werd herhaald met 30
herhalingen. Deze ‘drift’ (de verhouding tussen de horizontale verplaatsing en
de wandhoogte) werd vervolgens met 25% verhoogd voor de volgende

XXV

stappen. In totaal werden vijf stappen gevolgd door ten minste zes stappen
van tweezijdige cyclische drift toegepast, met driftwaarden variërend tussen
0,1‰ en 1‰, aangeduid als het lichte-schadeprotocol. Deze cycli, consistent
toegepast bij identieke verplaatsingen, simuleerden herhaalde aardbevingen.
Een alternatief belastingsprotocol, het asymmetrische lichte-schadeprotocol,
bestond uit cycli waarbij de drift in één richting dubbel zo groot was als in de
andere, wat de asymmetrie in daadwerkelijke aardbevingen nabootste. Muren
die naar verwachting zouden bezwijken op afschuiving werden getest volgens
dit protocol.
Fotogrammetrie om Scheuren Vast-te-leggen
Voor het observeren en vastleggen van scheuren in metselwerk werd in dit
onderzoek gebruik gemaakt van een geavanceerde fotogrammetrische
techniek genaamd Digital Image Correlation (DIC). Deze methode is
geoptimaliseerd om de resolutie te maximaliseren en verplaatsingen met hoge
nauwkeurigheid te meten. Het proces begon met het aanbrengen van een
speciaal ontworpen spikkelpatroon op het metselwerk. Dit patroon bestond uit
willekeurige vormen van 2 tot 4 pixels groot, die op gelijke afstanden van
elkaar werden geschilderd.
Voor de opname van beelden werd gebruik gemaakt van een camera met een
hoge resolutie van 51 megapixels. Een scherpe lens, ingesteld op een
diafragma van f/8, in combinatie met een flitser die afgaat op 1/63000 van een
seconde, zorgde voor scherpe en contrastrijke beelden die essentieel zijn voor
nauwkeurige beeldanalyse.
Verder werd een specifiek correlatiealgoritme ontwikkeld, gericht op het
nauwkeurig bepalen van de verplaatsingen van elk virtueel knooppunt op de
beelden. Dit algoritme stelde de onderzoekers in staat om met grote precisie
de discontinuïteiten in verplaatsing, oftewel de scheuren, te detecteren en te
analyseren. In tegenstelling tot traditionele software, die voornamelijk is
geoptimaliseerd voor het meten van vervormingen, kon het ontwikkelde
programma scheuren detecteren bij een minimale wijdte van 0,02 mm. Het
vermogen om deze fijne scheuren en hun voortgang gedurende verschillende
teststappen en herhalingen te volgen, biedt een ongekend inzicht in de
dynamiek en het verloop van scheurontwikkeling in metselwerk onder cyclische
belasting.

Summary

Samenvatting

XXVI

Samenvatting

Figuur I.1. Automatisch geïdentificeerde scheuren uit het verplaatsingsveld vastgelegd
door DIC van een bakstenen wand zonder opening. Ψ=2.1. De meeste scheuren volgen
de voegen van het metselwerk.

Drift-limieten voor Lichte Schade
De analyse van de experimentele resultaten voor metselwerkmuren heeft
significante inzichten opgeleverd over de relatie tussen verplaatsing in het vlak
van de wand en de ontwikkeling van scheuren, zoals gemeten via DIC. Er is
een sterke correlatie vastgesteld tussen de mate van drift en de omvang van
schade, naast de invloeden van andere relevante parameters zoals het type
wand, het gebruikte materiaal, de randvoorwaarden en de voortgang van de
test.
Uit de resultaten blijkt dat herhaalde verplaatsing leidt tot een lichte toename
van schade. Dragende muren die alleen aan de onderzijde waren ingeklemd
(cantilever) vertoonden een hogere tolerantie voor drift voordat vergelijkbare
schade optrad, in vergelijking met muren die zowel onder als boven waren
ingeklemd. Verder bleek dat massieve wanden gevoeliger waren voor schade
dan muren met openingen of traditionele bakstenen muren.
De experimenten hebben geleid tot het vaststellen van specifieke driftgrenzen
waarbij lichte schade begint op te treden. Voor kalkzandsteen muren ligt de
bovengrens 40% lager dan de grens van 0,5% die voor baksteen is vastgesteld.
Concreet begint waarneembare lichte schade bij een drift van 0,5‰ voor
baksteen en 0,6‰ voor CaSi, waarbij de scheurwijdte van 1mm wordt bereikt.
Deze vastgestelde limieten zijn essentieel voor het ontwerpen van wanden
waarvoor slechts beperkte significante schade wordt geaccepteerd.

XXVII

Voor oudere constructies die herhaaldelijk aan belasting zijn blootgesteld,
evenals voor massieve muren belast op afschuiving, wordt een 10% lagere
driftwaarde aanbevolen om de kans op significante schade te minimaliseren.
Scheuren Propageren vanuit Hoeken
De meest voorkomende scheuren verliepen horizontaal en trapsgewijs
diagonaal. In muren met openingen ontstonden de scheuren vaak vanuit de
hoeken van de openingen. In muren zonder openingen ontstonden vaak
meerdere diagonal trapsgewijze scheuren die uiteindelijk samenvloeiden tot
een enkele, gelokaliseerde scheur. Deze observaties onderstrepen dat zowel
de wijdte als de lengte van scheuren tegelijkertijd toenemen.
Een opvallende observatie uit DIC is dat scheuren detecteerbaar waren nog
voordat ze met het blote oog zichtbaar werden. Dit wijst op de aanwezigheid
van 'onzichtbare' scheuren die potentieel kunnen propageren onder
veranderende omstandigheden. Onder verhoogde belasting vertoonden alle
typen scheuren—horizontaal, diagonaal, verticaal, taps of uniform—
vergelijkbare verergeringen. Interessant is dat sommige van deze onzichtbare
scheuren zichzelf ontlasten en mogelijk nooit zichtbaar worden terwijl er ook
nieuwe scheuren ontstaan die alle aandacht naar zich toe trekken.
Verder bleek uit de experimenten dat kalkzandsteen metselwerk brosser lijkt
dan baksteen metselwerk, vooral in het geval van verticale scheuren die zich
ontwikkelen in de spandrels. In situaties waarbij de scheuren zigzaggen rond
de stoot- en lintvoegen, werd waargenomen dat deze scheuren de
kalkzandstenen verticaal splijten. Dit geeft aan dat het verband en de
samenstellende materialen van het metselwerk aanzienlijke invloed hebben op
de manier waarop schade zich manifesteert en ontwikkelt onder cyclische
belastingen.
Bovendien beïnvloedt herhaling de scheurpropagatie, waarbij identieke
belastingen leiden tot meetbare, maar consistente toenames in scheurwijdte
en -lengte. Omgekeerd geldt dat de kracht die nodig is om identieke drifts te
verkrijgen, met ongeveer 10% afneemt tussen de eerste en de laatste
herhaling van een stap.
Stap 3: Kalibratie van Modellen aan Experimenten
In deze fase van het onderzoek is samengewerkt aan de ontwikkeling van
numerieke modellen die het gedrag, waargenomen tijdens de experimenten,
nauwkeurig nabootsen. Naast het reproduceren van de stijfheid, (piek-) sterkte,
taaiheid, en na-piek capaciteit van de proefstukken, lag de focus op het
repliceren van scheurpatronen en hun propagatie.

Summary

Samenvatting

XXVIII

Samenvatting

We gebruikten de niet-lineaire eindige-elementenmethode (EEM) met vlakspanningselementen in combinatie met het constitutieve Engineering Masonry
Model (EMM) binnen Diana FEA software, wat succesvol bleek in het repliceren
van het experimentele gedrag na correcte afstelling van de materiaalparameters. Belangrijke parameters zoals de elasticiteitsmodulus, treksterkte,
en breukenergie speelden een cruciale rol in de kalibratie. Het EMM, dat
orthotroop is en zowel trek-softening in horizontale als verticale richting omvat,
alsook wrijving en afschuif-softening, bleek bijzonder geschikt voor deze taken.
Het model gebruikt een secant ontlasting/herbelasting voor trek en elastisch
voor afschuiving. In dit uitgesmeerde continuum scheurmodel zijn de
scheuroriëntaties vooraf vastgesteld (gefixeerd), hetgeen aanmerkelijk betere
resultaten geef dat een roterend scheurmodel. Andere aspecten zoals mesh
objectiviteit en convergentie zijn ook zorgvuldig onderzocht.
Hoewel de wandmodellen voldoende nauwkeurig waren, was het
rekenintensief om evenveel cycli te modelleren als in de experimenten.
Daarom werden in elke stap slechts drie cycli opgenomen, wat voldoende was
om een vergelijkbare degradatie waar te nemen die na drie cycli stabiliseerde.
In toekomstige studies zou het model verder verfijnd kunnen worden om de
cyclische degradatie die waargenomen werd tijdens de experimenten
nauwkeuriger te kunnen repliceren.
Daarnaast werden micro-modellen overwogen, met afzonderlijke modellering
van de stenen en mortelvoegen. Deze modellen leverden nauwkeurigere
resultaten op wat betreft de scheurpatronen, maar waren zeer rekenintensief.
Voor het omvangrijke aantal benodigde modellen werd uiteindelijk gekozen
voor het gebruik van het EMM continuümmodel, dat een goede balans bood
tussen nauwkeurigheid en computationele haalbaarheid.
Stap 4: Extrapoleren naar de Initiële Condities + Seismische Trillingen
In de vierde stap van het onderzoek zijn de modellen, die nauwkeurig
scheurinitiatie en -propagatie gedrag weergeven en die gevalideerd zijn aan
statisch-cyclische experimenten op muren en spandrels, verder ontwikkeld om
het effect van zettingen en aardbevingstrillingen te analyseren. Deze
extrapolatie-modellen zijn uitgebreid met dynamische tijdsnormen (NLTHA) en
bevatten meerdere essentiële aanpassingen om realistische gebouwomstandigheden na te bootsen.
Aan de bovenkant van het wandmodel is een massa toegevoegd die de
dynamische effecten van de vloer en het dak simuleert, wat essentieel is om
het daadwerkelijke gedrag van constructies tijdens seismische activiteiten te
begrijpen. Onderaan het model is een interface opgenomen die de interactie

XXIX

tussen de bodem en de constructie bij de fundering weergeeft. Verder zijn aan
de zijkanten van de muren veren aangebracht om de invloed van
aangrenzende dwarsmuren te simuleren. Bij de berekeningen met voorschade
wordt eerst aan de onderzijde van deze interface een ongelijkmatige zetting
aangebracht. Deze opgelegde verplaatsing simuleert het verlies van
ondersteuning zoals dat zou gebeuren bij zettingsschade, waardoor de muur
zakt en scheuren ontwikkelt die overeenkomen met schades waargenomen in
daadwerkelijk aangetaste gebouwen.
De intensiteit van deze opgelegde zetting is gevarieerd teneinde verschillende
initiële condities van schade, aangeduid als Ψ0, te genereren. Daarbij is ook
een scenario zonder zettingsschade (Ψ0=0) onderzocht. Vervolgens wordt als
tweede belasting een versnelling over de tijd aan de onderkant van de muur
opgelegd, nadat de tangentiële stijfheid van de grond-constructie interface is
vergrendeld, om zo de reactie van het metselwerk op seismische trillingen na
zetting te beoordelen.
Record-to-record Variabiliteit
In het onderzoek is record-to-record variabiliteit onderzocht door meerdere
versnellingssignalen te analyseren. Specifiek is gekeken naar vier signalen van
twee recente aardbevingen: twee van de aardbeving bij Zeerijp in 2018 en
twee van de aardbeving bij Westerwijtwerd in 2019. Voor elk van deze
gebeurtenissen zijn gegevens verzameld van opnames die zowel dichtbij het
epicentrum (ongeveer 3 km afstand) als verder weg (ongeveer 8 km afstand)
gemaakt zijn.
Het doel van deze analyse was om inzicht te krijgen in hoe de nabijheid van
een seismische gebeurtenis de impact op gebouwen kan beïnvloeden. Dit
omvatte het bestuderen van verschillen in frequentie-inhoud, de effectieve cycli
van de aardbevingen, en de interactie tussen horizontale en verticale
componenten van de seismische golven. Bovendien zijn de signalen geschaald
naar verschillende niveaus van PGV, variërend van 2 mm/s tot 100 mm/s, om
een breed scala aan seismische intensiteiten te simuleren. Voor de studie van
het repetitie-effect zijn de signalen herhaald toegepast in eenzelfde analyse, al
dan niet geschaald.
Veel Variaties in Parameters
Naast de initiële schade, aangeduid als Ψ₀, en de aardbevingsbelasting zoals
PGV en herhalingsfrequentie, zijn twee wand-geometrieën gemodelleerd: een
met en een zonder raamopening. Ook zijn twee bodemtypes onderzocht en
drie sets materiaalparameters, die verschillen qua elasticiteitsmodulus,
treksterkte, schuifsterkte en breukenergie. Dit leidde tot duizenden

Summary

Samenvatting

XXX

Samenvatting

geëxtrapoleerde wandmodellen. De analyses daarvan hebben belangrijke
inzichten opgeleverd over hoe de complexe interactie tussen bouwkundige en
materiaalkundige parameters de schade aan metselwerk beïnvloeden tijdens
aardbevingen:
Wand geometrieën: Muren met een raamopening (Gevel A) krijgen doorgaans
meer schade dan stijvere muren zonder openingen (Gevel B), vooral bij
aardbevingen die dichtbij plaatsvinden. De grotere schade bij Gevel A kan
toegeschreven worden aan spanningsconcentraties rond de raamhoeken, die
het ontstaan van scheuren vergemakkelijken.
Bodemtype: De aard van de ondergrond speelt een belangrijke rol in de mate
van schade tijdens aardbevingen. Gebouwen op zachtere bodem (type B)
ondergaan grotere vervormingen voordat ze vergelijkbare schade krijgen als
gebouwen op stijvere bodem (type A), waarbij de laatste scherpere
muurkrommingen en hogere spanningsniveaus veroorzaakt, wat resulteert in
ernstigere schade.
Afstand tot het epicentrum: De nabijheid van het epicentrum heeft een
significante impact op de schade. Bewegingen dichtbij het epicentrum hebben
de neiging om bestaande scheuren te propageren, terwijl bewegingen verder
weg de scheuren voornamelijk wijder maken, waardoor de schade zichtbaarder
wordt.
Initiële Schade: De aanwezigheid van initiële schade van een constructie heeft
een bepalende invloed op de ernst van de uiteindelijke schade wanneer
naderhand een beving optreedt. Constructies met een hoger niveau van
initiële schade tonen meer totaalschade na een aardbeving, hoewel de
incrementele schade afneemt bij hogere niveaus van voorschade.
Materiaaleigenschappen: Ook de eigenschappen van de gebruikte bouwmaterialen beïnvloeden het schadepatroon. Zwakkere materialen zijn minder
bestand tegen trek- en afschuifspanningen, wat leidt tot meet omvangrijke
schade onder identieke seismische condities vergeleken met sterkere
materialen.
Piek Grondsnelheid (PGV): Er is een directe correlatie tussen de intensiteit van
een aardbeving, gemeten door PGV, en de mate van schade. Hogere PGV's
leiden consequent tot ernstigere schade, wat een duidelijke relatie tussen PGV
en schade bevestigt.
Herhaling van aardbevingen: De invloed van herhaalde seismische
gebeurtenissen toont aan dat constructies die aan herhaalde bevingen worden
blootgesteld telkens een toename van schade laten zien, hoewel de toename
relatief kleiner wordt bij elke extra gebeurtenis. Kwalitatieve trends zijn

XXXI

getoond voor verschillende scenarios van herhalingsreeksen met oplopende of
afnemende intensiteit per beving.
Vastleggen van Relaties in een Model
Vervolgens is de invloed van elk van bovenstaande parameters vastgelegd in
een surrogaatmodel. Hierbij zijn twee verschillende technieken verkend om te
bepalen welke het beste de complexe interacties tussen aardbevingen en
schade kan simuleren.
De eerste benadering is een 'beredeneerd' model, dat waargenomen trends
omzet in specifieke wiskundige functies zoals machtsfuncties of logistieke
relaties. De coëfficiënten binnen deze functies worden vervolgens gekalibreerd
en ge-fit op de verzamelde data. Dit model stelt onderzoekers in staat om
fysische relaties rechtstreeks af te leiden, zoals het verband tussen hogere
schade en hogere piek grondsnelheid.
De tweede benadering betreft een supervised machine learning model,
waarbij een neuraal netwerk wordt getraind met de verzamelde gegevens.
Hoewel dit model uitstekend presteert op bepaalde datasets, blijkt het lastig te
generaliseren over verschillende soorten gegevens en faalt het in het
nauwkeurig vastleggen van de onderliggende fysische relaties.
Gezien deze bevindingen werd uiteindelijk gekozen voor het beredeneerde
model als het surrogaatmodel voor verdere analyses. Dit model biedt een
robuust raamwerk (framework) voor het simuleren van seismische responsen,
met expliciete formuleringen die de realiteit van bouwkundige variaties
nabootsen. Om rekening te houden met mogelijke onzekerheden in het model
en de strategie van de eindige-elementen-modellering (FE-modellering), is een
onzekerheids-parameter geïntegreerd. Deze parameter helpt bij het inschatten
van de invloed van mogelijke fouten in het model en andere onzekerheden
binnen de modelleringsstrategie, wat essentieel is voor het naderhand
verfijnen van de voorspellingen en aanbevelingen.

Summary

Samenvatting

XXXII

Samenvatting

Stap 5: Toewijzen van Verdelingen aan de Parameters en Bepalen van de
Schadekans
In deze fase van het onderzoek worden de verschillende parameters, die
invloed hebben op schade tijdens bevingen, gerepresenteerd door
probabilistische verdelingen. Dit helpt bij het kwantificeren van de
onzekerheden en variabiliteiten in de eigenschappen die worden gebruikt om
de modellen te kalibreren. Bijvoorbeeld, uit experimenten blijkt dat de
treksterkte van metselwerk normaal verdeeld is met een standaardafwijking van
30%. Deze verdeling wordt vervolgens dan toegepast in de wegging van de
model resultaten om consistentie te waarborgen.
De afstand tot het epicentrum wordt eveneens probabilistisch gemodelleerd.
Hogere piek grondsnelheden worden waarschijnlijker geacht naarmate het
epicentrum dichterbij ligt. Daarnaast is het type ondiepe bodem, essentieel
voor het bepalen van de interactie tussen de constructie en de grond tijdens
een aardbeving, uniform verdeeld verondersteld op basis van statistieken van
de bodems gevonden in de regio Groningen. Hierdoor kan een realistisch
beeld worden geschetst van de bodeminvloeden op de constructieve respons.
Met deze probabilistisch bepaalde parameters wordt een MonteCarlo simulatie
uitgevoerd met behulp van het surrogaatmodel. Deze simulatie berekent de
waarschijnlijkheid dat bepaalde waarden van de schadeparameter Ψ worden
overschreden voor gegeven piek-grondsnelheden en gegeven initiële
schadecondities. Dit resulteert in zogenaamde kwetsbaarheidscurven. Zo wordt
bijvoorbeeld onthuld dat muren van baksteen zonder zichtbare voorschade
(Ψ0=0) een kans van 5% hebben op het ervaren van zichtbare schade (Ψ≥1) bij
een PGV van 10 mm/s. Deze kans neemt toe naar 20% wanneer de muren zeer
lichte, voor het blote oog nog onzichtbare voorschade vertonen (Ψ0=0.5).
Kwetsbaarheidscurven omgezet in Kaarten
Kwetsbaarheidscurven bieden een waardevol instrument om de kans op
schade te voorspellen en kunnen worden gecombineerd met een verdeling van
piek grondsnelheden voor specifieke locaties. Dit resulteert in een
gedetailleerd beeld van de kans op schade door seismische gebeurtenissen op
die locaties. Voor een nog nauwkeuriger beeld kan de maximale piek
grondsnelheid van verschillende gebeurtenissen per locatie worden
vastgesteld, wat helpt om de maximale kans op schade voor metselwerkgebouwen in dat gebied te bepalen.
Deze informatie wordt vervolgens gevisualiseerd in een kaart. Figuur 5.4.5
toont een voorbeeld van de kans op een schadetoename van ∆Ψ=0.5 voor
een initiële schade van Ψ0=1, hetgeen overeenkomt met een juist merkbare

XXXIII

toename van initieel net zichtbare scheuren. Uit de kaart blijkt dat voor een
relatief groot gebied in het noorden van de bufferzone van het Groningse
gasveld, de kans op deze merkbare toename in lichte schade ongeveer 1 op
100 (of 1%) is. Over de gehele bufferzone en een groot deel daarbuiten ligt de
kans op lichte schade op 1‰. Dit suggereert een zeer kleine kans op het
ontstaan van scheuren die betrekking hebben op lichte schade. Als men
bijvoorbeeld tienduizend gebouwen in dit gebied beschouwt, zouden
statistisch gezien 10 gebouwen een verergering van schade van ∆Ψ=0.5
kunnen vertonen, met een kans van 50%. De kans op het overschrijden van
DS1 (Ψ>2.5) blijft echter ongeveer 0.1‰ voor de gehele bufferzone.

Figuur 5.4.5. Waarschijnlijkheidskaart voor de historische maximale PGV geconvolueerd
met de kwetsbaarheid van metselwerk. De figuur geeft de situatie weer met een ∆Ψ
van 0.5, voor een initiële conditie van net zichtbare schade,Ψ0=0.1.

Het Effect van Herhaling in Experimenten
In de experimenten die uitgevoerd werden op wanden en spandrels, zijn
herhaalde, identieke cycli gebruikt om de impact van herhaalde belastingen te
observeren. Ontdekt werd dat herhaalde verplaatsingen leiden tot een
fenomeen bekend als "krachtdegradatie", waarbij de kracht die nodig is om
dezelfde verplaatsing te bereiken afneemt. Dit effect stabiliseerde na ongeveer

Summary

Samenvatting

XXXIV

Samenvatting

dertig herhalingen. Verschillende testprotocollen, inclusief eenrichtings- en
tweerichtings-cyclische verplaatsingen, toonden consistentie in het effect van
krachtdegradatie. Opvallend was dat, indien een richting vooraf beschadigd
was, bij herhaald testen in diezelfde richting nauwelijks verdere degradatie
optrad. Bovendien leidden deze herhaalde verplaatsingen tot zichtbare
toenames in schade, vooral in de vorm van scheurpropagatie, wat suggereert
dat niet alleen de vereiste kracht afneemt, maar ook dat scheuren in wijdte en
lengte toenemen bij elke herhaling.
Het Effect van Herhaling in Modellen
De FE-modellen werden ook onderworpen aan herhaalde signalen, waarbij
vaak signalen met identieke piek grondsnelheden werden gebruikt, en soms
werd een heterogene sequentie geëvalueerd. Tijd-historieanalyses toonden
aan dat herhaalde gebeurtenissen inderdaad leiden tot een accumulatie van
schade, al waren de toenames klein. Interessant is dat trillingen van lagere
intensiteit dan de voorgaande de schade nauwelijks verhoogden, terwijl
trillingen van dezelfde of grotere intensiteit dan eerdere trillingen de schade
met ongeveer 10% konden verhogen. Zo wordt bijvoorbeeld een tweede
trilling van 10 mm/s verwacht de schade te doen verergeren met 6%. Echter,
de beperkingen in het aantal modellen en variaties, samen met een gebrek aan
vergelijkende veldgegevens, benadrukken de noodzaak om deze
modelgebasdeerde observaties verder te verifiëren en uit te breiden.
Schade Accumulatie Functie (DAF)
De resultaten van experimenten en modellen die het effect van herhaling
onderzoeken, zijn geïntegreerd in een geavanceerde functie, bekend als de
Schade Accumulatie Functie (DAF). Deze functie is ontworpen om de reeks van
PGV’s te evalueren, zoals die zou voorkomen in een werkelijke geschiedenis
van aardbevingen. De DAF bouwt voort op het bestaande surrogaatmodel en
wordt gebruikt om de waarde van de schadeparameter Ψ voor elke PGV in de
reeks te voorspellen.
De DAF genereert een probabilistische verdeling voor Ψ en berekent de
uiteindelijke schadeverergering vanuit een initiële schadestaat Ψ0. De functie
onderscheidt twee belangrijke componenten: één voor gebeurtenissen met
een PGV vergelijkbaar met eerdere gebeurtenissen, en een andere voor
gebeurtenissen waarbij de PGV groter is dan bij eerdere gebeurtenissen. Deze
laatste component resulteert in een grotere schadetoename. De DAF is
uitvoerig gevalideerd tegen zowel de resultaten van de modellen als tegen de
experimentele waarnemingen. De functie wordt uiteindelijk gebruikt om zowel
de verwachte schade als de waarschijnlijkheid van schade te schatten voor

XXXV

metselwerkwanden in de regio Groningen, die al decennialang worden
blootgesteld aan herhaalde aardbevingen.
Het Gebruik van de DAF in Vergelijking met Enkele Kwetsbaarheidscurven
Om de meerwaarde van het overwegen van schadeaccumulatie met de Schade
Accumulatie Functie (DAF) te bepalen, wordt een vergelijking gemaakt met
kaarten die zijn gegenereerd op basis van de maximale piek grondsnelheid
voor enkele gebeurtenissen. Bij deze enkele gebeurtenissen zijn de contouren
van schade meestal cirkelvormig, wat voortkomt uit de manier waarop de
Ground Motion Prediction Equations (GMPEs) de voortplanting van beweging
baseren op de afstand tot het epicentrum. In tegenstelling tot deze enkele
gebeurtenissen, houdt de DAF rekening met meerdere gebeurtenissen die elk
hun eigen epicentra hebben, wat resulteert in onregelmatige vormen van
schadecontouren.
Bovendien blijken de buitenste waarschijnlijkheidscontouren van de enkele
gebeurtenis kleiner te zijn dan die gegenereerd door de DAF. Dit toont aan dat
het overwegen van het cumulatieve effect van meerdere gebeurtenissen leidt
tot hogere kansen op schade. Verder zijn de contouren volgens de DAF in het
centrum van de regio aanzienlijk groter dan buiten het centrum, hetgeen wijst
op de invloed van meerdere verspreide epicentra en een groter aantal
gebeurtenissen.
De DAF heeft significant invloed op specifieke locaties, vooral in gebieden die
dicht bij het centrum van de regio liggen maar relatief ver van een specifieke
grote gebeurtenis, zoals de aardbeving bij Huizinge. Bijvoorbeeld in Delfzijl,
waar de kans op zichtbare schade minder dan 1% is in het geval van de
aardbeving bij Huizinge, stijgt deze kans naar 10% wanneer rekening wordt
gehouden met de volledige geschiedenis van gebeurtenissen. Echter, de kans
op het overschrijden van een schadestaat van Ψ≥2.5 wordt nauwelijks
beïnvloed, ook niet door de initiële schadeconditie. Dit illustreert dat een
enkele, grote gebeurtenis hier een belangrijkere rol speelt dan het cumulatieve
effect van meerdere kleinere gebeurtenissen, die, ondanks hun aantal, niet
genoeg zijn om lichte schade significant te doen toenemen.
Deze analyses benadrukken het belang van het integreren van de geschiedenis
van seismische activiteit in het beoordelen van bestaande schade en het
voorspellen van toekomstige schade, en tonen de noodzaak aan om zowel
individuele grote gebeurtenissen als opeenvolgende kleinere trillingen in
overweging te nemen bij het beoordelen van schade risico’s.

Summary

Samenvatting

XXXVI

Samenvatting

Bijdragen in Vergelijking met de Literatuur
Deze studie hanteert een bottom-up fysische en probabilistische benadering
die zich onderscheidt van de bestaande literatuur die vaak empirisch,
deterministisch en ‘benaderend terugschalend’ van bezwijksgrenstoestanden
naar lagere schadegrenstoestanden zijn. Diverse substantiële bijdragen, met
name op het gebied van seismische schadebeoordeling en modelvalidatie zijn
geleverd. Er zijn drie soorten referentiestudies geïdentificeerd die elk
specifieke uitdagingen (of onderwerpen) vertegenwoordigen waaraan deze
studie heeft gewerkt.
Ten eerste, empirische analyses, die vaak worstelen met het isoleren van de
oorsprong van gerapporteerde schade. Deze analyses bieden beperkt inzicht
omdat ze geen kwantitatieve conclusies kunnen trekken over de specifieke
effecten van aardbevingen of het effect van herhaling van dergelijke
gebeurtenissen. De aanpak in deze studie decomponeert de effecten en maakt
gebruik van gedetailleerde data en simulaties om directe correlaties en causale
relaties te identificeren, die helpen bij het nauwkeuriger voorspellen van
schade.
Ten tweede worden extrapolatie methoden behandelt. Deze worden
gewoonlijk gebruikt om het gedrag en de schadelimieten van constructies
onder seismische belasting te voorspellen, zoals gebaseerd op Ultimate Limit
State (ULS) of pushover analyses. Hoewel deze extrapolerende methoden
nuttig zijn, missen ze vaak de precisie om duidelijke grenzen voor zichtbare
schade en de voortplanting ervan uit te drukken. De in dit onderzoek
ontwikkelde modellen en schadeaccumulatiefuncties (DAF) bieden meer
gedetailleerde en fysisch-onderbouwde toepasbare inzichten binnen de
vastgestelde grenzen.
Ten derde zijn er studies die scheurvorming onderzoeken, maar vaak falen in
het kwantificeren van de schade of het gebruiken van deze data om modellen
te kalibreren. Deze studies bieden zelden een praktische benadering voor het
gebruik van voorspellingsmodellen in echte scenario's. In tegenstelling tot
deze studies, heeft de hier ontwikkelde benadering niet alleen de
modelkalibratie verbeterd maar ook de toepasbaarheid van de modellen in het
voorspellen van het effect van aardbevingen op schade verhoogd.
Slotopmerkingen
Dit onderzoek was gericht op het kwantificeren van de kans op lichte schade
aan metselwerk door herhaalde seismische trillingen, met speciale aandacht
voor de aanwezigheid van voorschade. De toegepaste methodologie, waarin
experimentele data gebruikt worden om numerieke modellen te valideren en

XXXVII

deze modellen vervolgens gebruikt worden om de impact van belastingen op
scheur-schade te voorspellen, heeft effectief aan de doelstelling voldaan.
De studie heeft belangrijke inzichten opgeleverd over het effect van
aardbevingen. Herhaalde seismische gebeurtenissen verhogen de (kans op)
schade met ongeveer 10%, afhankelijk van de intensiteit van de PGV.
Aanzienlijke schadeverschillen ontstaan vooral wanneer PGV’s de 10 mm/s
overstijgen, wat leidt tot een waarneembare toename in schade. Specifiek in
de seismische regio Groningen hebben bakstenen muren aanzienlijke zichtbare
schade opgelopen, met scheuren van minimaal 0,1 mm wijdte in de periode
van 2000 tot 2020. In de bufferzone van het Groningse gasveld is de kans op
dergelijke schade over het algemeen minstens 1‰. Deze kans verhoogt echter
aanzienlijk—tot wel tien keer—indien er reeds enige initiële, zij het onzichtbare,
schade aanwezig was. Enkel in een beperkt gebied bereikt de kans op het
overschrijden van de serviceability limit state (DS1/DS2) een percentage van
1%, zelfs als de constructies aanvankelijk zichtbare schade vertoonden.
De bevindingen benadrukken het belang van rekening houden met historische
seismische activiteiten en de initiële staat van bouwconstructies bij het
voorspellen van toekomstige schaderisico’s, en onderstrepen de noodzaak van
geavanceerde monitoring en preventieve strategieën om de aardbevingsbestendigheid van bouwwerken in seismisch actieve regio's te verbeteren.
Beperkingen van de Studie
De methodologie van deze studie, hoewel uitgebreid, omvat enkele
beperkingen die de interpretatie en toepasbaarheid van de resultaten
beïnvloeden. Eén primair aandachtspunt is het toevoegen van monitoring in
het veld. De huidige benadering gaat vooral uit van gecontroleerde of
gedecomponeerde lab-experiments, maar de bevindingen, hoewel
veelbelovend, vereisen validatie met (lange termijn) veldgegevens.
Betrouwbare monitoring gedurende een lange periode is echter complex en
kostbaar, en biedt geen garantie dat alle onderliggende schadeoorzaken
volledig worden ontrafeld. Daarnaast zijn er ook andere beperkingen
verbonden aan de methodologische aanpak:
In deze studies dienen wanden als een vereenvoudigde representatie voor
volledige metselwerkgebouwen. Het effect van driedimensionale constructies
en meer complexe gevels dient verder onderzocht te worden, ondanks dat
voorlopige resultaten een goede overeenstemming tonen. Verder, de studie
heeft zich voornamelijk gericht op in-het-vlak schade-effecten in halfsteen
muren. Uit-het-vlak effecten, hoewel minder relevant voor lichte schade,

Summary

Samenvatting

XXXVIII

Samenvatting

evenals de progressie van scheuren in steensmuren en ter plaatse van
bouwkundige aansluiting met kozijnen, vereisen verder onderzoek.
De conclusies zijn primair geldig voor metselwerk van baksteen. Andere
bouwmaterialen, zoals kalkzandsteen, gedragen zich mogelijk anders. Hoewel
kalkzandsteen in sommige experimenten is opgenomen, moet de
kwetsbaarheid ervan nog grondig worden beoordeeld. De waargenomen
degradatie op materiaalniveau wordt niet volledig weergegeven in de huidige
numerieke modellen. Het ontwikkelen van een cyclisch degradatie-effect voor
het gebruikte Engineering Masonry Model (EMM) zou de nauwkeurigheid van
deze modellen verbeteren.
De validatie van modellen is uitgevoerd met behulp van quasi-statische
experimenten, die zijn geëxtrapoleerd naar scenario's met dynamische
belasting. Verdere experimenten onder deze dynamisch belaste
omstandigheden zijn noodzakelijk om de complexiteit van seismische belasting
en scheurmonitoring adequaat te begrijpen.
Deze beperkingen benadrukken de noodzaak voor aanvullende studies en
alternatieve benaderingen om de robuustheid van de onderzoeksresultaten te
verhogen en de realiteit van seismische impact op gebouwen nauwkeuriger te
modelleren.
Toekomstperspectief: Relevantie van Lichte Schade in de Toekomst
In de toekomst zal het begrip van lichte schade nog belangrijker worden,
vanwege de toenemende impact van klimaatverandering, veranderingen in de
bodem en de overstap naar hernieuwbare energiebronnen.
Extreme weersomstandigheden zoals stormen, droogtes en overstromingen
zullen naar verwachting toenemen, wat kan leiden tot schade aan gebouwen
en toenemende geïndiceerde zettingen. Dit zal het incasseringsvermogen van
gebouwen op de proef stellen en nieuwe uitdagingen met zich meebrengen
voor bouwprojecten.
De overgang van fossiele brandstoffen naar hernieuwbare energie zal eveneens
invloed hebben op gebouwen. Geothermie en ondergrondse energieopslag
kunnen, net als gaswinning, leiden tot bodembeweging en daarmee tot
schade aan constructies. Slecht beheerde renovaties en de overgang naar
nieuwe energietechnologien kunnen constructies tot schade leiden.
Nederland heeft de uitdagingen van door gaswinning veroorzaakte seismiciteit
ervaren met tekortschietende communicatie en trage beleidsimplementatie,
wat heeft geresulteerd in publieke weerstand. Duidelijke beleidsmaatregelen

XXXIX

zijn nodig om bouwgerelateerde kwesties en klimaat- en mijnbouwrisico’s
effectief aan te pakken.
De toekomst vereist het bouwen aan een samenleving die deze risico's
accepteert en weet te managen, met een duidelijk begrip van de relatie tussen
gevaren en schade. Dit kan alleen worden bereikt door proactieve
beleidsmaatregelen en een nauwe samenwerking tussen overheden,
wetenschappers en de gemeenschap.

Summary

Samenvatting

How to Read this Dissertation
The reader will notice certain peculiarities in this work.
First, references may be cited using square brackets or
author names. References in numbered square brackets [1
- 33] are my own publications or collaborations; see the List
of Publications. Other references are cited with authors’
names; see the Bibliography. This approach makes it easier
to identify works with which the reader may be familiar,
while keeping citations brief and avoiding the repetition of
this author’s name. Similarly, the literature list includes two
lines for each work, the first line exactly as it is referenced
in the text. Finally, references in curly brackets {5.3} indicate
sections within this text.
Second, figures and tables are referred to not merely as
names but as addresses. For example, Figure 3.3.2, with its
full address (not name), is Figure 2 in Section 3.3. Within
the same section, it may be referred to simply as Figure 2,
while from within Chapter 3, it can be identified as Figure
3.2. This is similar to how telephone landlines used to
work, allowing users to skip country and area codes when
calling within the same region. Similarly, this method is
employed to refer to neighbouring sections within the
same chapter. Moreover, some figures may appear out of
order. Figure 2 may appear before Figure 1 if the latter is a
full-page figure that allowed space for Figure 2 before it.
The figures are sequential to the order in which they are
referred to in the text.

Chapter 1
Introduction
Prologue
Since the earthquake of Huizinge in August of 2012, the area surrounding the
Groningen gas field in the north of the Netherlands, has been the scene of
social and economic unrest due to the light and frequent seismic vibrations
causing damage to the existing building stock. The earthquakes began two
decades earlier, but not until the Huizinge earthquake would their effect be
clearly recognised.
Many studies have been carried out to determine the safety of the buildings
subjected to these earthquakes. However, the appearance of small cracks on
the walls, often without major structural significance, has been much more
widespread than severe, safety-concerning damage. These minor cracks have
led to a large number of damage claims, triggering social unease, and
impacting the local and national economy. Many other actions on structures,
like settlements induced by the soft Dutch soil or thermal effects, intrinsic to
structures, cloud the cracks’ origins. This unclear relationship between the
earthquakes and the damage, together with the initial focus on safety, means
that small cracks have not been studied extensively.
This crack-based damage, categorised into the so-called damage state 1 (DS1),
started to receive technical attention in recent years as the (international)
expertise shifted when the safety of the structures had been appraised and the
inverse of proof was implemented - a ruling that declared all cracks to have
been caused by earthquakes unless proven otherwise. Still, their initiation and
later accumulation with existing causes, remains understudied and is thus the
focus of this work.
This introductory chapter further explains the background of this study,
presents a brief literature review into efforts to characterise minor damage in
masonry, details the resulting research questions to fill the current knowledge
gaps, and includes an outline of this work.

Chapter 1

1

2

Chapter 1

1.1. Relevance
1.1.1. Societal Relevance
The Groningen region has experienced significant societal and economic
unrest due to the seismic activities linked to gas extraction. The frequency of
minor seismic events, particularly highlighted by the notable Huizinge
earthquake of 2012, has led to a proliferation of damage primarily manifesting
as minor, often superficial cracks. This damage, while sometimes dismissed as
merely cosmetic, has broader implications for the affected communities. Not
only do these cracks reduce the aesthetic and market value of properties, but
they may also compromise the structural integrity and safety of buildings,
leading to concerns over watertightness, increased susceptibility to
environmental damage, and reduced perception of safety.
Moreover, the identification and attribution of responsibility for these damages
are critical in a societal context where legal and insurance frameworks rely
heavily on clear causation. The ruling, that assumes all cracks are caused by
earthquakes unless proven otherwise, has placed a significant burden on the
shoulders of gas extraction companies, impacting their operational strategies
and their interactions with local communities. This situation has led to a
heightened demand for effective damage assessment and repair strategies that
are both timely and economically viable. Understanding and addressing minor
damage is thus crucial for maintaining public trust and ensuring that the social
fabric of the region remains intact.

1.1.2. Scientific Relevance
From a scientific perspective, the Groningen case presents a unique
opportunity to study the effects of induced seismicity on masonry structures—a
subject that has been under-explored in the broader field of earthquake
engineering. While substantial research has focused on the structural impacts
of natural seismic events, the nuanced effects of smaller, recurrent, man-made
earthquakes pose different challenges. These challenges include the
assessment of damage that does not immediately compromise building safety
but may affect its long-term usability and maintenance: light damage. In fact,
the science looking at the Ultimate Limit State (ULS) is mature. Yet, it concerns
an extremely low probability of failure associated however with large
consequences of structural collapse and loss of life. In contrast, the light
damage, or Serviceability Limit State (SLS), linked to more likely failures,
product of repeated seismic events and with relatively small consequences
(cracks), is scarcely or only superficially investigated.

3

The scientific relevance of studying this minor damage extends beyond the
mere characterisation of damage. It involves developing predictive models that
accurately reflect the cumulative effect of multiple minor seismic events on
masonry structures. Traditional models often fail to address the initiation and
propagation of minor cracks, particularly in the context of repeated exposure
to low-intensity seismic vibrations. This gap in knowledge is critical not only for
predicting future damage but also for designing buildings that are resilient to
such events. Additionally, understanding the specific causes and mechanisms
of minor damage can lead to innovations in building materials and construction
techniques that are specifically tailored to resist such actions.
Furthermore, the shift in international expertise towards a more detailed
understanding of seismic impacts, as evidenced by the inverse proof ruling,
underscores the need for a scientific approach that can dissect the interplay
between seismic forces and building responses. This understanding is key for
developing more effective mitigation and adaptation strategies in regions
similar to Groningen or others around the world facing similar issues due to
induced seismicity. Studies on the effect of other potential sources of induced
seismicity, like geothermal energy, will also benefit from this work.

Figure 1.1.1. An example of a narrow crack in fired-clay brick masonry with a stretcher
pattern and a cementitious general-purpose mortar in 10mm bed and head joints. This
photograph was obtained from an experiment on a wall (see Chapter 3).

Chapter 1

Introduction

4

Chapter 1

1.2. State of the Art and Knowledge Gaps
This brief literature review provides a glimpse into the state-of-the art of the
understanding of minor cracking of masonry (light damage). In particular,
damage due to the effects of gas extraction to buildings. These are composed
by quasi-static and dynamic soil movements. The former lead to gradual
subsidence over a kilometre-scale region, which is much larger than the
building scale and are thus mostly unrelated to building damage; hence,
damage from deep subsidence is not considered herein (see Appendix A). The
latter, dynamic movements, result in seismic vibrations which are more likely to
affect structures at the building scale. The focus is placed on Dutch masonry
buildings, often pre-damaged by other causes such as (local) ground
settlements or temperature movements. A specific overview of literature is also
included in subsequent chapters.

1.2.1. Literature and its Limitations
Earthquakes, induced by gas extraction activities in the north of the
Netherlands (Pickering et al. 2015, Vlek 2018), have triggered extensive studies
into the safety and damage vulnerability of unreinforced masonry structures
(Crowley et al., 2019). These structures, built throughout the region and in the
rest of the country, were never prepared to be exposed to seismic activity and
its resulting vibrations. Consequently, the unreinforced fired-clay brick masonry,
ubiquitous to masonry veneers or outer cavity wall leaves and also present in
older (double-wythe) structural walls, has exhibited damage, principally, in the
form of cracks opening in the plane of the walls (Van Staalduinen et al. 2018).
The earthquakes, frequent, but light in nature, with vibration levels in the order
of 5 to 20 mm/s (Noorlandt et al., 2018), have led to mostly aesthetic or
cosmetic damage, depicted by cracks which are considered to range between
0.1 and 5 mm in width.
While wider cracks and more severe damage have been reported in rare cases,
these are outside the scope of this study, laying the focus on lighter and more
common expressions of damage due to processes acting in the plane of the
walls. Out-of-plane failures are more commonly associated with the ultimate
limit state (ULS) or near-collapse states of the structures, while light damage is
linked to in-plane actions (Van Staalduinen et al.). The focus is thus on the
minor damage states, DS1 and DS2. Damage states, as defined by the
European Macroseismic Scale (Grünthal et al. 1998, de Vent et al. 2011)
categorise the condition of a structure on a scale of zero to five where DS0
corresponds to no damage, DS1 to aesthetic damage and DS5 to total
collapse.

5

To estimate the impact of seismic activity on a regional level and to predict its
future consequences, it is necessary to quantify the probability of damage to
buildings. Studies have sought to characterise the behaviour of masonry
structures for the states DS3 to DS5 as these are relevant for quantifying the
safety of the structures (Esposito et al. 2016 & 2019, Messali et al. 2018,
Tomassetti et al. 2017, Graziotti et al. 2017) yet, the durability/cosmetic
damage state (DS1), or light damage, more difficult to evaluate due to the
increased influence of the variability in the structures and materials and the
interaction of other loading processes, has proven to be especially relevant in
the context of induced seismicity where an operator is responsible for the
damage with associated economic losses and social unrest (Bakema et al.
2018).
The lower damage states are usually identified in various manners; four
methods are highlighted:
Extrapolation from Higher Damage States
First, some studies obtain DS1 by extrapolating it from higher damage states
related to building safety or its near-collapse state. Gehl et al. (2013) for
instance, uses the yield displacement of a bilinear curve fit to the results of a
pushover analysis to establish where the threshold for DS1 should lie. Similarly,
Crowley et al. (2019), uses single degree of freedom approximations of
pushover curves from a variety of Finite Element models; however, these and
the consequences of lateral building deformations are tuned to the nearcollapse state, with DS1 being defined as the yield point in the bilinear curve.
Since DS1 represents durability, cosmetic, and/or aesthetic damage, its
intensity cannot be captured with a bilinear curve that expresses the strength
and deformation capacity of the structure.
Empirical Damage Claims Analysis
Second, other studies quantify DS1 empirically using data from case reports or
damage claims. For example, Crowley et al. (2018), looked at the number and
type of earthquake damage claims submitted in the Groningen region up to
2015 and associated it with the local seismic intensity of various earthquake
events by using ground motion prediction equations (GMPEs). In this way, they
determined the likelihood of damage against increasing earthquake intensity.
However, the accuracy of the empirical approach is affected by the way the
samples are captured, with an unknown number of undamaged cases and
uncertainty of the different thresholds that motivated claims to be submitted.
Moreover, the initial situation of the structure, and thus the accumulation of
damage, are unknown.

Chapter 1

Introduction

6

Chapter 1

Masonry Panel Cracking Studies
Third, additional studies look at cracking in masonry panels. For instance,
Didier et al. (2018) quantified damage based on cracks on masonry panels
subjected to in-plane actions. While the Swiss masonry of the study does offer
insight into the fundamentals of masonry cracking, it differs from Dutch
masonry in stiffness, strength and toughness. Furthermore, the aspect of
repetition, when the masonry is subjected to identical loads, is not covered in
this reference study; and, a damage scale to assess the aggravation of the
damage is also not part it.
Finite Element Models and Probability Analysis
Fourth, a few studies analyse the probability of damage initiation using finite
element models. A known study is that of Waarts (1997), who adapted the FE
models of Raaijmakers (1994), with probabilistic distributions of the material
parameters. This allowed the estimation of the probability of when damage
would appear at increasing measures of ground motion. Still, the initiation of
damage was measured using the tensile strength of the masonry; this is
insufficient to capture the intensity of the damage since stresses redistribute
when materials crack and because exceeding the tensile strength does not
necessarily lead to visible cracks.

1.2.2. Knowledge Gaps
The literature and industry practices concerning the effects of man-made
seismic events, particularly in the context of minor structural damages such as
narrow cracks in masonry, reveal significant knowledge gaps that this research
aims to address. These gaps, as derived from the overall discussion and the
specific insights into the current state of understanding, are as follows:
Quantification and Visibility of Minor Damage
There is a critical need for a robust methodology to quantify minor cosmetic
damage. Current literature lacks detailed, consistent criteria for when such
damage becomes visible and how it progresses under repeated seismic loads.
This gap hinders effective prediction and management of the damage, clear
communication about damage, setting of thresholds for reimbursements, and
comparisons between cases, among other limitations.
Experimental Studies on Crack Development
There is a lack of experimental research observing the behaviour of masonry
under seismic conditions with a focus on minor damage states. Most studies do
not adequately explore the initiation stages of cracking and how these cracks

7

develop over time under various loading scenarios. The campaign that began
in 2017 at TU Delft marks a significant step, but comprehensive studies are still
required to establish a broad base of empirical evidence.
Modelling of Cosmetic and Durability-Related Damage
While existing studies have primarily focused on assessing structural strength
and safety, there is a noticeable deficiency in models that specifically address
cosmetic and durability aspects of damage, such as crack width and
progression. Existing finite-element-method (FEM) models are not sufficiently
detailed or validated in terms of capturing the initiation and propagation of
minor cracks, especially under conditions of repeated seismic activity. This
limitation calls for the development of enhanced models refined through
experimental validation.
Characterisation of the Probability of Light Damage
The literature indicates a gap in characterising the probability of light damage,
particularly in terms of how material properties, seismic events, and other/
existing loading actions contribute to such damage. This lack of detailed
exploration makes it challenging to predict and mitigate light damage
effectively. There is a need for more sophisticated probabilistic models that can
incorporate the variability of materials and the complex interactions of different
load types.
By addressing these knowledge gaps, this research will not only contribute to
the academic field but also provide practical insights and tools that can
significantly improve the management of seismic risk in regions similar to
Groningen. This work is poised to enhance both the scientific understanding
and the practical approaches to dealing with minor, yet significant, structural
damage caused by induced seismicity.

Inconsistent
damage
definition

Models
insufficiently
validated on crack
propagation

Lack of accurate
crack monitoring
during experiments

Variability and effects No quantification of
probability of damage

Figure 1.2.1 Main knowledge gaps highlighted.

Chapter 1

Introduction

8

Chapter 1

1.3. Research Objective
Induced earthquakes may lead to damage in masonry buildings; repetition may
aggravate this effect. The contribution of earthquakes to damage claims is
uncertain. The stated problems, in the context of the societal and scientific
relevance and within the frame of the knowledge gaps identified, lead to the
goal of this work: to objectively and probabilistically quantify the initiation
and aggravation of crack-based damage in (pre-damaged) masonry for
repeated seismic events characterised by their intensity in Peak Ground
Velocity (PGV).
To achieve this objective, several subquestions are formulated:
i.

What is a damage scale or measure capable of objectively characterising
masonry light damage (for various relevant causes)?

ii.

How can cracking, relevant for light damage, be accurately…
a.

surveyed from experiments? And,

b.

modelled for masonry? (Collaboration with other authors)

iii.

How is light damage, caused by settlement or other autogenous actions
in masonry buildings, aggravated by seismic vibrations, especially after
multiple seismic events?

iv.

What is the probability of visible light damage for masonry structures in
the region of Groningen, primarily due to seismic actions, but
considering the probable current state of the buildings?

v.

How is the appearance of intrinsic light damage hastened* by seismic
vibrations? *See Glossary.

This leads to a method and a strategy for the quantification of the probability
of damage initiation and aggravation. To further illustrate the context and
approach of this work, a few hypotheses are presented next.
Intuitively, masonry with existing cracks is more vulnerable than undamaged or
virgin masonry. Yet, the additional flexibility of the cracked masonry may help
the structure in dynamic situations. This emphasises the need to quantify the
effect of pre-damage in terms of the increase of the probability of additional
damage. Moreover, it could be expected that initial damage will also increase
the probability of additional damage; and, that repeated loading will further
increase this probability. Similarly, damage may accumulate with exposure to
repeated earthquake events. Consequently, seismic events may hasten the
intrinsic development of light damage in a masonry structure, where (existing)
damage from shrinkage, thermal, or settlement phenomena is common.

9

Additionally, there may be a threshold below which cosmetic damage is not
relevant and above which damage is no longer cosmetic.
Note that the probability of earthquake damage for a general building is a
concept that differs from the attributability of attested damage having been
caused by an earthquake for a particular building. In this case, the context of
the building will alter the probability of damage; this is the specific
vulnerability. For example, the probability of damage due to a seismic event for
masonry buildings in one region may be 5%. For a specific building showing
damage, it does not mean that the damage is 5% attributable to the
earthquake nor is the damage 5% likely to have been caused by the
earthquake. If for this particular building, other damaging causes (like
settlements or recent renovations) are more or less relevant, the probability of
the earthquake being the cause of the damage will differ. In this work, the
general probability of damage for masonry buildings is explored.

1.4. Research Methodology
The quantification of the probability of damage initiation and aggravation has
been casted into is a five step process, further exemplified herein by the
assessment of masonry cracking due to settlements and vibrations. This
process is presented in Figure 1.4.1 and partly related to the structure of this
text.
Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Definition of
Crack-based
Damage

Experiments
for cracking
in Masonry

Calibration of
Models

Extrapolation
with Models

Probabilistic
Modelling of
Fragility

Figure 1.4.1. Five steps to physically understand light damage.

The first step is to determine a scale with which to measure the damage; this is
handled in Chapter 2. The scale should be compatible and capable of
measuring damage caused by all the actions considered [1, 14]. In a
deterministic approach, individual cases are assessed; this does not give insight
into the likelihood of observing damage in a population of buildings. For this,
computing the probability of damage is needed.
Secondly, to accurately determine the probability of damage, several
fundamental aspects about the masonry need to be known. Some are obtained
from earlier, referenced studies; for instance, the characterisation of the
material properties and their variability is procured from the extensive research
of Jafari et al. (2017); here, the expected variations of, for example, the tensile

Chapter 1

Introduction

10

Chapter 1

strength or the Young’s Modulus of the masonry is investigated from replicated
material tests based on samples from real structures in the Groningen region.
Additionally, how cracks propagate in masonry must be understood; this is the
basis of the second step. Several experimental campaigns, comprising a multiscale approach with walls and spandrels, have been conducted with this goal;
an overview is provided in Chapter 3. This step is thus to experimentally
observe the processes that lead to in-plane, crack-based damage.
The third step comprises the calibration of models capable of replicating the
damage of interest. This is included in Chapter 4 which expands on the
possible damage-causing actions, how these can be modelled, and what
effects are influential and should be considered. Moreover, to determine the
probability of damage, numerous and accurate models of structures need to be
evaluated; these models call for a representative view of reality. The
experiments conducted on masonry walls, monitoring the initiation and
propagation of cracks and gathered in Chapter 3, were used in various studies
to develop calibrated computational models tuned to replicate the behaviour
of the walls not only in terms of stiffness, strength, and hysteresis but also of
the intensity and pattern of cracks [1, 2, 3, 12]. These models are partly
included in this work in Chapter 4.
The fourth step comprises the investigation of damage as a result of one or
several actions with the calibrated models that then become extrapolations to
new situations. The models are expanded to simulate the behaviour of masonry
walls within the constraints of a structure interacting with the soil and the
vibrations of earthquakes; the latter component is taken from a complementary
study [5]. The deformation of the soil during earthquake vibrations and in prior
potentially damaging processes was seen to lead to increased light damage
and earlier damage detection (Van Staalduinen et al. 2018, [4, 15]). This is also
introduced in Chapter 4 and further implemented in Chapter 5.
In the exploration with these extrapolation models, the effect of initial damage
is also considered. Since soft soils are predominant in the Netherlands, the
majority of Dutch buildings, founded on shallow (strip) foundations, need to
account for settlements. It follows that settlements are a common cause for
existing damage. Therefore, settlement deformations are selected as the cause
of the initial damage considered in this work.
These prior steps have dealt with the deterministic, yet vital background for the
probabilistic assessment required. These are employed to further the insight
into light damage. Using physical modelling to characterise probabilistic
behaviour can be a powerful tool (Fiore et al. 2014, Rapone et al. 2020). The
extension or extrapolation with the existing calibrated models is explored in

11

Chapter 5 and used to create a large pool of results where the relationships
between damage and parameters such as the material strength, soil type,
earthquake intensity, etc. can be explored. These relationships are then
captured in a surrogate or regression model. Such a model, investigating the
physical implications of the established relationships, is developed in Chapter 5
and used, on the basis of a Monte Carlo simulation, to compute the pursued
fragility curves depicting the probability of damage. This represents the fifth
and final step of the proposed method. Additionally, Chapter 5 includes
fragility curves not only for earthquake damage and earthquake-caused
aggravation of existing settlement damage, but also for settlement damage
given (curvature) deformations in the soil. These serve as a further example of
the methodology presented.
This project comprises therefore, three main research aspects: experiments, FE
models, and analyses of the damage behaviour of masonry based on
experiments and models.
Yet an additional chapter is included. While the probability of damage is
characterised in Chapter 5, the effect of repetition is independently
investigated in Chapter 6. This chapter comprises both analyses from the
models, to estimate the damage behaviour of masonry, subjected to repeated
earthquakes, and from the experiments, subjected to repeated cycles. This is
used to compose a damage accumulation function (DAF) that describes how to
increase the damage value for earthquakes with different intensities, or how
much of an increase can be expected due to the repetition of actions. In a
sense, Chapter 6 presents additional fragility curves for the repetition of events
over time.
The text is concluded with Chapter 7 which includes the answer to the research
questions, an analysis of the limitations of the approach presented,
recommendations for future study, and an outlook on relevant topics.

Figure 1.4.3. Word cloud of the text highlighting the 30 words most frequently used.

Chapter 1

Introduction

12

Chapter 1
Chapter 1

Introduction
Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Damage scale to measure
crack-based damage and
its accumulation

Chapter 4

Experiments to observe
crack initiation and
propagation

Actions that cause crack-based
damage to masonry buildings
Collaborations

Calibrated models to
reproduce cracking
behaviour

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Parameters and their
relationship to damage
and its probability

Effect of Repetition

Chapter 7

Conclusions

Figure 1.4.2. Outline of this work.

In addition to the outline of Figure 2, which presents the topics treated in this
work, the word cloud of Figure 3 illustrates the contents of this text in a keyword based graphic. The thirty words that appear most often are presented
and vary in size depending on their frequency, with ‘damage’ being the most
used. Similar variations of the same word are grouped; for example,
‘earthquake’ and ‘earthquakes’. Short and common english words are not
considered. Each chapter is provided with a similar word cloud further
highlighting the topics discussed; however, the chapter clouds exclude the
most commonly used words in the rest of the text such that only the unique
topics in each chapter are highlighted. Like in several publications, where
keywords are employed, these figures represent the content of the chapter; yet
unlike those keywords, these are based on the words that are used the most.

Chapter 2
Damage Metric for
Masonry Cracking
What is a damage scale or measure capable of objectively characterising
masonry light damage (for various relevant causes)?
This chapter proposes Ψ, a crack-based damage parameter, for the objective
measuring of damage and its aggravation (∆Ψ). The content is partly based on
several adapted publications but is expanded to include unique insight and
new work, consolidating the background of Ψ into a single chapter.
Related works are [1, 2, 14, 23]; see List of Publications.

Chapter 2

13

14

Chapter 2

Chapter 2 : Table of Contents
2.1. Background and Introduction
15
2.1.1. Necessity for Objective Measurement................................................16
2.1.2. Damage in Masonry ............................................................................16
2.1.3. Fracture Mechanics and Cracks-based Damage ................................19
2.1.4. Visible Cracks and Visibly Aggravated Cracks ....................................22
2.1.5. Limitations of Existing Approaches.....................................................24
2.2. The Ψ Damage Parameter
28
2.2.1. Damage Classification Based on Visibility and Ease of Repair ...........28
2.2.2. Cost of Repair .....................................................................................29
2.2.3. Proposal for Ψ Damage Intensity Parameter ......................................32
2.2.4. Thresholds for Ψ, ∆Ψ, and Their Meaning .........................................35
2.2.5. Agglomeration of Ψ ...........................................................................39
2.2.6. Perception of Damage and Ψ .............................................................39
2.3. Utilisation: Examples of Application of Ψ
41
2.3.1. Ψ in Experiments surveyed with Digital Image Correlation................41
2.3.2. Damage Aggravation by ∆Ψ in Finite Element Models .....................44
2.3.3. Predictions with Ψ ..............................................................................46
2.4. Discussion
47
2.4.1. Transitory and Residual Damage ........................................................47
2.4.2. Summary of Advantages, Disadvantages and Limitations ..................48
2.4.3. Potential Future Improvements ..........................................................49
2.4.4. Relevance of Ψ for Modelling and for Real Life Uses .........................51
2.5. Conclusions about Ψ, ∆Ψ, Ψ0

51

Damage metric for masonry cracking

15

2.1. Background and Introduction
To quantify damage, one must first define it and its quantification. “Damage” is
any detrimental change in state, reduction in value, or loss of performance or
function. The definition of damage will change depending on the perspective
too, whether technical or juridical. This requires additional detail.
In the fields of damage assessment or loss prediction, a damage scale is the
first step in defining what kind of damage is being considered and how its
expression looks like. The simplest damage scale has two categories:
undamaged and damaged. A threshold set for a measure of the damage is
used to distinguish between the two states. Depending on the kind of damage
being considered, a suitable measure should be selected. For example, a bent
steel profile can be considered damaged if a permanent deformation is
observable; or, a masonry wall may be described as frost-damaged if spalling
or scaling of the bricks has occurred. Damage scales can be subdivided into
additional states or grades, each linked to a range of a measurable/observable
parameter or a combination of parameters. Each measure is linked to an
expression of damage. If damage is defined as observable manifestations of
lack of performance, then the threshold is the value where damage becomes
observable.
These concepts will be further described in this chapter focusing on the
definition of an objective, continuous damage scale to assess crack-based
damage in masonry. Section 1 explains what damage actually is, what cracks
are in masonry, when they become visible, how they have been measured into
damage so far, and why these approaches are insufficient.
Section 2 presents a proposal for a continuous damage parameter linked to the
visibility of the damage and its cost of repair, building upon the limitations of
earlier strategies. Section 3 shows examples of the application of this
parameter to further emphasise its relevance and usefulness. Next, section 4
discusses the limitations and disadvantages of this approach while drawing
some comparisons to the world of concrete crack damage. Finally, section 5
presents the main conclusions of this chapter. For the reader that wishes to
understand this story in a different sequence, a table of contents is provided.

Chapter 2

Prologue

16

Chapter 2

2.1.1. Necessity for Objective Measurement
A damage scale is objective if a given damage is always categorised into the
same damage state regardless of the measuring equipment, the experience of
the assessor, or the exhaustiveness of the report. This fact is so important, that
this subsection is placed before others to set the context.
The Cambridge dictionary defines objective as being “based on real facts and
not influenced by personal beliefs or feelings”. For example, many damage
scales, that quantify damage from soil movements, contain descriptors
specifying whether doors or windows have become stuck (Grünthal et al. 1998).
The degree to which doors or windows are stuck will inevitably depend on the
experience of the observer. Such a damage scale could be useful to roughly
assign a state to a large number of buildings following a field investigation or
rapid assessment (Ademović et al. 2020), but would not be suited to accurately
track the increase in damage of a single building over time, especially if several
inspectors are involved.
To measure small increases in damage, a damage scale needs to be objective.
The definition of the scale must be such that it employs quantifiable measures.
If it can be assessable by an automatic system, then the definition is likely
objective. Depending on the measure, meaningful thresholds can be set such
that damage states are distinct. Empirical data can sometimes help establish
meaningful thresholds (Boscardin & Cording, 1989).

2.1.2. Damage in Masonry
This work is about quantifying damage in masonry; specifically, damage that is
caused or aggravated by seismic vibrations. For this purpose, one must first
understand the different types of damage that can appear in masonry and
relate them to different (kinds of) actions that cause them; Figure 2.1.1 and
Table 2.1.1 help to provide such understanding (Gill & Malamud, 2014). There
are several expressions of damage or symptoms of problems in masonry; the
most commonly mentioned is cracking, where the material splits creating
fissures or cracks that represent discontinuities or openings.
Cracks result in a reduction in strength (Almeida et al. 2012), allow for ingress
of water or pollutants into the material or into the structure (which can result in
additional damage due to other causes), and lead to a lesser perception of
safety and aesthetic value (Sucuoğlu, 2013). Cracks are usually caused by
actions that demand excessive strength of the structure; see next subsection.
De Vent (2011) and Van Staalduinen et al. (2018) also provide comprehensive
strategies to relate damage patterns to actions.

C. Photos of practical session

17

Chapter 2

Damage metric for masonry cracking

Figure 25: Compression tower test. Left: Calcium silicate brick, right: clay brick

Figure 2.1.1. Examples of expressions of damage in masonry. a) A crack at the corner of
a structure. b) Fine vertical cracks in the masonry due to excessive compression
(crushing). c) Blistering on the bricks and the mortar due to efflorescence of salts. d)
Serious scaling or delamination likely due to freeze-thaw cycles.

Another expression of damage are blisters (Lubelli et al. 2004). These consist of
small “bubbles” that form under the surface of the masonry and expel a
portion of the material. Depending on the type of blisters, these can lead to
larger portions of material delaminating from the masonry (Stryszewska &
Kańka 2019). These larger pieces are a symptom called spalling, scaling or
flacking and are usually caused by the freezing of moisture inside the masonry,
crystallisation of salts/pollutants, or rapid temperature changes such as
exposure to fire. Very high frequency vibrations can also lead to delamination.
Finally, masonry can also be damaged internally. To determine internal
weakening, one must use (ultrasonic) radar, x-ray or other scanning techniques.
The degree of blistering or spalling can be related to a section loss at the
surface of the material, for instance. Since this work focuses on actions causing
cracking however, this expression will be emphasised.

18

Chapter 2

Table 2.1.1. Expressions of damage commonly associated with various processes with
mostly mechanically-based processes at the top of the table and chemically-based
processes at the bottom. The focus of this work is placed on cracking. An empty circle
indicates “a weaker relationship”.
Expressions of Damage (Symptoms)
Actions / Processes

Section Loss
Cracking

Spalling/
Scaling

Blistering

Internal
Weakening
not observable

Overloading

●

Earthquakes

●

○

Vibrations (Other)

●

●

Wind loading

●

○

Settlements

●

○

Thermal-hygro variations

●

●

Fire

●

●

●

●

Freeze-thaw cycles

●

●

○

●

Erosion by wind or
water
Biological
(insects or animals)

●
●

●

●

Salt crystallisation

●

●

●

Material imperfections

○

○

●

●

Formation of expansive
compounds (including
pollutants, corrosion)

●

●

●

●

Dissolution and leaching

●

●

Ageing

●

●

Damage metric for masonry cracking

19

Earthquake and settlements are of interest when considering crack-based
damage in the Netherlands (Negulescu et al. 2014). Consequently, the focus in
this work is placed on actions that lead to an excessive strength demand from
the masonry (structure) and result in visible cracks. Gravity or wind overloading,
vibrations, and soil deformations are usually associated with the expressions of
cracks.
Masonry is a brittle or quasi-brittle material. When subjected to tensile stresses,
the material quickly reaches its tensile strength and fractures. Once fractured,
the tensile capacity rapidly diminishes until tension can no longer be resisted.
This rapid reduction in tensile capacity after fracturing is called softening and
characterises masonry as a quasi-brittle material (Rots & De Borst, 1989).

Figure 2.1.2 Tension stress-strain diagram illustrating the behaviour difference between
ductile (plastic, hardening) and brittle (with softening, i.e. quasi-brittle) materials.

For (quasi-) brittle materials, such as unreinforced masonry, the maximum
tensile strain is near the maximum elastic strain, meaning that shortly after
reaching the maximum tensile strength, a crack will form suddenly, without
warning prior to it. (Almeida et al., 2012). Additionally, because of this
extremely low ductility pre-peak, cracks can also appear in shear of
compressive zones, where the conjugated stress direction is in tension. In
comparison to ductile materials, brittle ones exhibit no hardening in tension,
that is, a stress higher than the maximum elastic stress is not possible and the
material exhibits a post-peak softening in the stress-strain relation (Hillerborg,
1985). This means that cracks are unstable: If a crack initiates, the load applied
to (the fracture surface of) the material needs to be reduced otherwise the
crack will rapidly “snap” through the entire section (Rots et al., 1997). Figure
2.1.2 illustrates this fundamental difference between ductile and brittle
materials. It is worth noting that perfectly brittle materials have a theoretical

Chapter 2

2.1.3. Fracture Mechanics and Cracks-based Damage

20

Chapter 2

softening region of zero, while quasi-brittle materials have a “longer” softening
curve; since the point of transition between perfectly and quasi-brittle materials
is subjective, the materials are here denoted as simply brittle. Masonry and
concrete are also known as elastic-softening materials, implying that the strains
localise into a crack, while the material at either side of the crack unloads
elastically (e.g. Rots, 1985). Micro-cracks coalesce into a visible macro-crack.
Cracking in masonry occurs due to fracture of mortar and/or bricks or
debonding of mortar and bricks. While the parameters governing these three
cases are not equal, all seem to be accurately described by a brittle fracture
with softening theory (CUR, 1990; Almeida et al., 2012), such as developed for
concrete brittle fracture by Hillerborg et al. (1976 and 1985). The application of
this theory has been executed successfully by many authors including:
Červenka et al. (1998) including a mixed-mode behaviour (that is, observing
the modification of shear on the fracture), or by Schneemayer et al. (2014) who
observed the influence of groves on the fracture’s characteristics. Cracks in
masonry usually follow the mortar joints unless the failure mechanism forces
cracks to run through bricks, as is the case when shear effects are predominant
(Rots et al., 1997).
Settlements, for instance, cause cracking in masonry and the stresses are
relieved once the newly developed crack has allowed the structure to
accommodate to the settlement (Simpson & Grose, 1996). Similarly, contraction
and expansion due to environmental temperature changes, may also lead to
cracks which relieve the stresses caused by these actions (Scherer, 2006). Other
loads of a dynamic nature, such as vibrations or earthquakes, also produce
transient tensile stresses which trigger cracking in masonry. Unless these loads
are extreme, cracking is focused around areas where stresses are higher and
the dynamic loads cease before the cracks extend.
Sufficient literature is available on the (tensile) strength of masonry and the
brittle nature of cracking, but the propagation of brittle cracking under
repetitive loading appears to require additional research. Vandoren et al. (2012)
also explored the initiation and propagation patterns with a computational
model, but did not observe the case of repetitive loading and damage. The
propagation and growth of cracks due to repetitive loading (some dozens of
applications) must not be confused with the phenomenon of fatigue, common
to ductile materials and where the loss of strength is related to an internal
weakening of the material due to thousands or millions of stress variations (e.g.
traffic or wave loading).
In a masonry element, such as a wall, the loss of local stiffness due to an
initiated crack, may be sufficient to accommodate the amplitude of the

Damage metric for masonry cracking

21

It is important to note that the physical properties of masonry can be divided
as those of the anisotropic, heterogeneous composite, or of the individual
elements that compose it (bricks, mortar and bond). In the latter case, the
parameters of the head (vertical) joints or of the bed (horizontal) joints, as well
as the bond between bricks and mortar in these cases, may all be different.
This makes reproducing, testing, and modelling masonry quite difficult and
vulnerable to uncertainties.
For a comprehensive characterisation of masonry, all tension, shear, and
compressive behaviour must be characterised in stiffness, strength, and
toughness. The flexural behaviour, which is a mix of tension and compression,
is sometimes characterised separately, too. This is because of the highly nonlinear properties of the masonry composite. In shear (Mode II), Coulomb
friction, consisting of friction and cohesion with softening, represents the
behaviour of the joints well.

Figure 2.1.3. Behaviour possibilities for illustrative crack propagation when subjected to
a load repetition of equal intensity. Top: photo of a bond-wrench test on a masonry
couplet.

Chapter 2

repetitive load without further cracking; or, the load progresses the crack until
the failure of the entire fracture surface. Figure 2.1.3 demonstrates this
dichotomy.

22

Chapter 2

The compressive behaviour of masonry is more complex (Vermeltfoort, 2005).
Here, failure occurs via the crushing of mortar, or of bricks, or spalling of
mortar, or of bricks, or by instabilities. Since masonry is heterogeneous, it is
particularly prone to buckling instabilities. Local instabilities also contribute to
spalling. Here, compressive stresses result in high perpendicular tension
stresses that cause fracture of the bricks (Ewing et al., 2004). Masonry in
compression has a small hardening region before gradually softening
(Lourenço, 1996). This can be modelled as following a bi-parabolic curve.
Nonetheless, the compressive behaviour of masonry is not of much relevance
when observing light damage due to cracking for low-rise masonry dwellings,
and as such, won’t be treated further.
Olivito et al. (2001), Grünberg et al. (2005), Reyes et al. (2008), Wang et al.
(2012), and Vandoren et al. (2012) in particular, have all looked at the initiation
and propagation of cracks in masonry. All of these studies agree: that the
tensile capacity of masonry is low, that the bond between bricks and mortar is
the most likely place for failure, and that cracks can propagate rapidly due to
the brittle nature of the bond. From these and other studies, the path of the
crack (or crack pattern), can be inferred based on the stress conditions. As
such, the initiation and propagation of tensile cracks is a fairly certain
phenomenon when the load and boundary configurations and material
properties are known. However, none of these studies addresses the
propagation of cracks under cyclic or repetitive loading. Here, the behaviour of
a crack or of a crack pattern on a wall is still unknown. Engineering judgement
predicts that for repetitive increasing loading, cracks should grow, but for
repetitive constant loading this is difficult to infer.

2.1.4. Visible Cracks and Visibly Aggravated Cracks
So far, cracks have been presented as a relevant expression of damage in
masonry. It follows that wide cracks correspond to more intense damage than
narrow cracks. There are several ways to categorise the severity of cracks: the
degree to which they compromise watertightness, the cost of repairing the
masonry, or the visibility of the cracks. For the first, depending on the type of
masonry, one could establish a relationship between the width of a crack and
the water permeability over a unit length; setting meaningful threshold
however, is not straightforward. For the second, repair or intervention
techniques will differ depending on the intensity of the damage, varying from
sealing or repointing to replacement. While thresholds can be set, these are
not readily apparent when detecting the damage. The visibility of the damage,
albeit subjective, does present an intuitive path to selecting thresholds for both

Damage metric for masonry cracking

23

the initiation as the propagation of damage and it’s directly related to the width
of the cracks and thus the intensity of the damage.

b.

c.

d.

Chapter 2

a.

Figure 2.2.0. Photographs of cracks in bare masonry walls. (a) Small crack narrower than
0.5 mm; (b) crack approximately 2 mm wide; (c) crack narrower than 2 mm; and (d),
wider than 5 mm. Adapted from [SBR].

In the best of lighting and contrast conditions, the normal human eye can
distinguish lines down to 30µm in width (see for instance, Österberg, 1935).
The highest display resolutions on available mobile devices today have pixel
sizes of 45µm, while high-resolution computer monitors have pixel sizes of
approximately 0.2mm and conventional LCD monitors of 0.5mm. It follows that
on a rough surface such as a wall, in particular when it has not been plastered,
cracks narrower than 0.1mm are almost impossible to detect; in the context of
visible damage, no damage would be apparent. Based on practical experience
during testing, the limit of 0.1mm was confirmed as a sensible lower boundary
to detect damage.
On a wall with one crack, when a second crack becomes visible, damage on
the wall has become visibly more intense. It is more difficult, however, to
determine when an existing crack has become visibly wider. Comparing two
lines side-by-side or observing a line become wider, makes it easier to
determine if a line is thicker. Cracks do not behave this way; the earlier state of

24

Chapter 2

the crack is not available to compare directly (unless two photographs are
compared) nor do cracks coincidentally widen under observation. As a rule of
thumb, narrow cracks must triple before an increase can be perceived, while
wider cracks of 10mm may be only 10% wider before aggravation becomes
observable.
Similarly, an aggravation of damage due to an increase in length can be
considered. Seldom do cracks propagate in length without increasing in width.
Moreover, the noticeability of an increase in length is actually linked to a local
increase in width. In other words, the tip of the crack, which was invisible
before, will become wider such that it will cross the threshold of what is visible.
Hence, an increase in length is a discussion of a local increase in width at the
crack tip.

2.1.5. Limitations of Existing Approaches
An extensive presentation of damage definitions and quantifications will not be
presented. Instead, this subsection focuses on the strategies employed by
some key sources and highlights their limitations when attempting to
objectively quantify crack-based damage aggravation.
Alternatively, the reader is referred to the work of De Vent (2011) who collected
and contrasted a multitude of damage assessment strategies from various
handbooks and sources. They identified four ways in which damage was
classified: 1) based on the material where damage is present, 2) based on the
type of element where damage appears, 3) based on the cause of the damage,
and 4) based on the appearance or type of damage. For this work, several of
these classifications are preordained: the material is masonry, the location are
walls, and the appearance defines crack-based damage.
In this context, a limited field of masonry crack-based damage can be
scrutinised. The European Macroseismic scale (EMS) includes a damage scale
for masonry buildings subjected to earthquakes. It is discretised into five
damage grades or states with the following descriptors. Sometimes, DS0 (No
damage) is included.
Damage Grade 1 (DS1): Slight Damage. Hairline cracks in very few walls; fall of
small pieces of plaster; cracks in a few tiles. Generally, the damage is mostly
cosmetic and easily repairable, affecting non-structural elements.
Damage Grade 2 (DS2): Moderate Damage. Small cracks in many walls; fall of
fairly large pieces of plaster; cracks in chimneys, often from top. Some
structural elements might be slightly affected. The damage requires more

Damage metric for masonry cracking

25

Damage Grade 3 (DS3): Substantial to Heavy Damage. Large and extensive
cracks in most walls; partial collapse of chimneys; detachment of roofs from the
main structure. Structural damage is evident, and there might be a need for
extensive repairs or reinforcement before the building can be considered safe
for occupancy.
Damage Grade 4 (DS4): Very Heavy Damage. Serious failure of walls, with
partial collapses; collapse of roofs and floors. The building has sustained
serious structural damage across multiple elements, potentially requiring very
extensive repair or suggesting that demolition and rebuilding might be more
feasible.
Damage Grade 5 (DS5): Destruction. Total or near-total collapse of the
structure. The building is destroyed to the extent that it is beyond repair, and
reconstruction is necessary.
There are several issues with this scale if one wants to look at damage
consisting of small cracks. First, the descriptors are not precise enough to
determine an aggravation of damage. If the grades or classes are large, when
considering damage aggravation, few cases would change classes, so the
conclusion would be that there was no aggravation in damage. A continuous
scale avoids this issue and is thus ideally suited to evaluate damage
aggravation.
Many studies have been specific about the usage of crack width as the main
descriptor or measure in the scale. Burland et al. (1977), Boscardin & Cording
(1989), or Mair et al. (1996) all use crack width to define damage grades.
However, they refrain from being specific about the crack widths linked to the
threshold between grades. The number of cracks is mentioned to have some
influence but is not specified. Hence, it is possible that two inspectors would
assign two different damage grades to the same structure - this is not
objective.
Some studies that employ a continuous scale, actually look at crack width as
the only indicator; see Chen & Hutchinson (2010). The maximum crack width is
the measure of damage. This is useful when observing a structure where only
one crack is present or only one crack is expected, like a single beam subjected
to three-point bending. With this approach, it is possible to accurately measure
damage and its aggravation. The issue arises when several cracks appear.
Typically, the maximum overall crack width is used, but this is not
representative of damage where multiple cracks are present.

Chapter 2

significant repair but does not typically compromise the overall structural
integrity of the building.

26

Chapter 2

Other studies make the link directly to the probability of damage. This is the
case, for instance, of Waarts (1997). Here, the flexural strength of the masonry
is used as the threshold for damage. This doesn’t not have a clear relationship
with visible crack-based damage.
Yet other studies set the threshold on the cause of damage. This is the case of
the SBR (Trillingsrichtlijn A: Schade aan bouwwerken, 2017). Here, a limit on the
intensity of a vibration is set so that damage to a neighbouring building is
unlikely. For ‘sensitive buildings’, which presumable are those with a certain
degree of initial damage, the limits are reduced. Nevertheless, the type of
damage that is being limited is not discussed.
Comparison vs. Classification Strategies for Concrete Damage
Like masonry, concrete can also develop cracks. Crack-based scales for
concrete also exist. However, concrete is typically reinforced. The
reinforcement changes the nature in which cracks appear, usually producing a
greater number of fine, parallel cracks.
Farhidzadeh et al. (2013) employ the maximum crack width to classify crackbased damage in concrete walls. This is consistent with the Structural Health
Monitoring strategies employed for concrete where a single crack is used to
assign a damage grade. Whether there are many other cracks of similar width
or none at all, is not considered. However, Farhidzadeh et al. propose a new
damage index based on the fractal dimension formed by a net of cracks. In
reinforced concrete, cracks are “smeared” due to the rebar; a denser net of
cracks, and thus a higher fractal dimension, will correspond to higher strains
and greater damage. According to the consulted work, this damage index
offers a good representation of the damage state of a concrete component as
it correlates better with the loss of lateral stiffness of the tested shear walls.
However, this approach is not useful for unreinforced masonry where cracks
coalesce into wider, discrete cracks instead of forming nets.
Bhowmick & Nagarajaiah (2020) work on identifying multiple cracks from a
concrete element but do not elaborate on the intensity of the damage due to
the multiple cracks. Soysal & Arici (2023) however, investigate cracking over the
thickness of a concrete monolith. On its face, multiple parallel cracks can
appear depending on the hazards intensity. To characterise the intensity of
damage, they employ the sum of the multiple crack widths. In this manner,
whether the crack strain localises into a single crack or is smeared over multiple
openings, is considered in the damage grading.
Similarly, Younis et al. (2020) recognise that using a crack width to define the
damage state of large-diameter reinforced concrete pipes is subjective during

Damage metric for masonry cracking

27

In sum, literature about crack-based damage classification strategies for
concrete is scarce. The focus lies on the maximum crack width to identify the
damage intensity. In the case of parallel cracks, the total crack width is also
used.
Summary of Knowledge Gaps
Specific gaps about existing strategies to assess damage in masonry have been
recognised. First, imprecise descriptors make it difficult or subjective to classify
cases into grades. These are missing precise values for the width and number
of cracks. Crack length is not mentioned. Second, the coarseness of the grades
doesn’t allow to measure small increases in damage.
These translate into requirements for the proposal of a new damage scale.

Chapter 2

visual inspections. Instead, they conduct destructive tests to relate the
expected crack width to a deformation-based indicator, more compatible with
current laser inspection tools, in order to improve the relevant ASTM standard.

28

Chapter 2

2.2. The Ψ Damage Parameter
To measure whether damage is present or has worsened, a damage scale is
useful. In this section, a damage parameter and its corresponding damage
scale is proposed. The goal is to formulate a scale that is objective,
quantitative, continuous, comparable between cases, related to detectability
and ease of repair (cost), relatable to existing scales, and applicable to the type
of damage being investigated.
Hence, the new parameter is meant to characterise crack-based masonry
damage associated with “light damage”. The parameter will be used to assess
damage and increases of damage in experiments, thought, it can be used to
evaluate damage in numerical models, too.

2.2.1. Damage Classification Based on Visibility and Ease of Repair
Burland & Wroth (1977) first proposed a damage scale based on the width of
the cracks and used it to analyse masonry damage in structures subjected to
soil deformations. In the same context, Boscardin & Cording (1989) employed
the same damage scale to compare empirical data on soil deformations and
building damage. Table 2.2.1 summarises this scale. Heath et al. (2008) also
uses a similar crack-based scale derived from the Australian Standard AS2870;
the scale is based on a single crack width.
Indeed, while the scales are based on the width of cracks, the number of cracks
also affect the damage state that a building would be assigned to. This is not
entirely defined in the scale, leading to loss of objectivity. Additionally, other
descriptors such as damage on service pipes, also partake in the scale. The
thresholds are defined based on the type of repair that would be needed and
thus indirectly also on the cost of the repair. Nonetheless, one should not
assume that crack width is a hard measure to distinguish between repair
strategies.

Figure 2.2.1. A transparent ruler usually used to determine crack width when held
against a wall. Printed 1:1.

29

To formulate a more objective scale, the intensity of the damage must be
related to a single expression of damage and be fully quantifiable, regardless
of the number of the cracks. Furthermore, the crack width, directly related to
visibility, is a good measure to quantify aesthetic damage. In most damage
scales for measuring building damage, this first grade is denoted damage state
1 - DS1. In the scale initially proposed by Burland & Wroth (1974), DS1 is
subdivided into 3 categories.

2.2.2. Cost of Repair
The damage scale proposed by Burland et.al.(1977) and expanded by
Boscardin and Cording (1989) is roughly related to the relative cost of repair
between the different strategies required for different types or intensity of
crack-based damage. Consequently, the proposed parameter is also related to
the cost of repair. To better explore this relationship, Table 2.2.2 has been put
together enumerating the costs of common repair strategies in the
Netherlands. For example, “very slight” damage would require repainting at
about €40/m2, while “slight” damage would need repointing at €100/m2,
about 2.5x as expensive. Similarly, “moderate” damage, requiring the
replacement of portions of masonry, could cost €400/m2, or about 10 times
more than “very slight” damage. This information is used to inspire the
formulation of the proposed parameter; see next.

Chapter 2

Damage metric for masonry cracking

30

Chapter 2

Table 2.2.1. Adapted from Burland et.al. (1977), Boscardin & Cording (1989) and
Giardina et al. (2013). Damage scale definition based on width of repair and thresholds
set by ease of repair. Notice that crack length is not mentioned.
Category
of
damage

Aesthetic
damage

Damage

Description of typical damage and ease of
repair

Negligible

Hairline cracks of less than about 0.1mm
width.

up to 1mm

Slight

Cracks easily filled. Redecoration probably
required. Several slight fractures showing
inside of building. Cracks are visible externally
and some repainting may be required
externally to ensure water tightness. Doors
and windows may stick slightly.

up to 5mm

Moderate

The cracks require some opening up and can
be patched by a mason. Recurrent cracks can
be masked by suitable linings. Repainting of
external brickwork and possibly a small
amount of brickwork to be replaced. Doors
and windows sticking. Service pipes may
fracture. Weather-tightness often impaired.

5 to 15mm
or a number
of cracks
> 3 mm

Severe

Extensive repair work involving breaking out
15 to 25mm
and replacing sections of walls, especially
but
over doors and windows. Windows and door
depends on
frames distorted, floors sloping noticeably.
number of
Walls leaning or bulging noticeably, some loss
cracks
of bearing in beams. Service pipes disrupted.

Very
severe

This requires a major repair involving partial
or complete rebuilding. Beams lose bearing,
walls lean badly and require shoring.
Windows broken with distortion. Danger of
instability.

(DS2-DS3)

Structural
damage,
affecting
stability
(DS3-DS4)

up to
0.1mm

Fine cracks which can easily be treated during
normal decoration. Perhaps isolated slight
Very slight
fracturing in building. Cracks in external
brickwork visible on close inspection.

(DS1)

Functional
damage,
affecting
service

Approx.
crack width
(mm)

> 25mm
but
depends on
number of
cracks

Damage metric for masonry cracking

31

Table 2.2.2. Approx. unitary repair cost of typical masonry damage in the Netherlands in
2020. Adapted from [IMG repair matrix, 2020].
Lower Upper
bound. bound.

Dilation joint, conversion or new € / m

€ 25

€ 35

€ 30

Painting / Coating

€ / m2

€ 35

€ 50

€ 40

Repointing

€ / m2

€ 60

€ 190

€ 100

Repointing with epoxy mortar

€ / m2

€ 120

€ 440

€ 280

Replacement of individual units

€ / unit

€ 50

€ 120

€ 100

Replacement of masonry

€ / m2

€ 280

€ 700

€ 400

Reinforcement cavity: helical
ties
Local replastering/filling of
cracks
Replastering

€/m

€ 90

€ 165

€ 130

€/m

€ 70

€ 115

€ 100

€ / m2

€ 155

€ 215

€ 190

€/m

€ 80

€ 225

€ 150

Interior
Decorative plastering
Finishing
Wallpaper
(in addition
to plastering) Wallpaper (Fibre)

€ / m2

€ 50

€ 125

€ 90

€ / m2

€ 30

€ 85

€ 50

€ / m2

€ 60

€ 200

€ 100

Soldier lintel repair /
replacement
Concrete lintel repair /
replacement

€/m

€ 100

€ 500

€ 300

€/m

€ 160

€ 800

€ 500

Steel lintel replacement

€/m

€ 800

€ 900

€ 850

All

Exposed
brick, base
masonry

Plastered
masonry

Lintels

Repair cracks and base for
interior plastering

Chapter 2

> 10 m,
> 10 m2

Repair Type

1 m,
1 m2

Median
Unit. Cost

Unit

Type

32

Chapter 2

2.2.3. Proposal for Ψ Damage Intensity Parameter
The earlier scales based damage on crack width and partly on the number of
cracks. However, the number of cracks and the relative importance of
numerous cracks is not clear. Therefore, a new damage scale is proposed that
includes this. The number of cracks, and their length, will also be related to the
cost of repair.
The resulting damage scale can be used to determine the importance of
various damage situations and evaluate modelling results. Furthermore, the
way it is presented indicates the amount of repair costs, as will be explained
later.
The damage scale shown in section 2.2.1 can be associated with a continuous
parameter fit to match the most relevant thresholds between grades. This
parameter is symbolised with the capital greek letter Ψ. First, the threshold
between negligible and visible damage, corresponding to crack widths of
0.1mm, is matched to a value of Ψ=1. The next threshold, for cracks wider than
1 mm which would then require repair, is matched to a value of Ψ = 2. This
results in the following fit (Equation 2.1), where c is the width of the crack and
the factor 2 and exponent 0.3 are algebraically solved for. The trend of this
power law is illustrated in Figure 2.2.2, where the link between Ψ and crack
width is also shown.

Ψ = 2 ⋅ c 0.3

Equation 2.1

However, the number of cracks (n) is also a relevant parameter. This is not clear
from the damage scale defined in Table 2.2.1 but, section 2.2.2 treating the
cost of a repair intervention, is presented to complement this definition. So as
to not affect the relationship presented in Equation 2.1, another power law is
presented and defined in Equation 2.2. Here the exponent of 0.15 means that
one additional crack increases the measured damage by 11%, a further
additional crack by 6%, the next one by 4%, etc. This influence is illustrated
also in Figure 2.2.2.

Ψ ∼ n 0.15

Equation 2.2

This is congruent with costs where an additional crack does not represent much
additional labor nor material. It also means that the value of Ψ remains close to
the definition of the Burland damage scale.
Finally, there is the matter of crack length. Longer cracks are more costly to
repair. And while some contractors may charge repair costs directly
proportional to the crack length, it is the crack width which defines the strategy
of repair and thus the main cost; see again Tables 2.2.2 and B.1. Consequently,

33

the cost of repair of a wall with several cracks of different widths will be
dominated by the width of the widest crack. More importantly, the visibility of
the damage will be even more influenced by the widest cracks. Yet, the cost of
repairing two cracks of different width should be offset towards the longer
crack, even if that is the narrower crack and especially if it is the wider crack.
This is achieved by weighting the average crack width by the length of each
crack. Since crack width is more important, it is set squared in Equation 2.3,
where the weighted average crack width is determined. The choice for the
square exponent follows from Table 2.2.2 and engineering judgement;
ultimately, since costs can vary, the exponent is somewhat arbitrary.
n

cw =
ci =

∑i=1 ci2 ⋅ Li
n

∑i=1 ci ⋅ L i

Weighted crack width: Equation 2.3

co2 + cs2

Squared Sum. Equation 2.3b

Where ci is the maximum crack width of crack i in millimetres, and Li is the
length in millimetres. The crack width is composed by both the opening (co)
and sliding (cs) components. Most visible cracking is characterised by crack
opening (Mode I), but sliding at the interface (Mode II) can also because visible
damage as small parts around the fracture break off. The resulting crack width
is the squared sum of the opening and sliding displacements as per part b of
equation 2.3. In most cases however, only the opening component is relevant.
The final equation to compute Ψ is thus as follows:

Ψ = 2 ⋅ n 0.15 ⋅ cw0.3

Definition of Ψ: Equation 2.4

Chapter 2

Damage metric for masonry cracking

34

Chapter 2

10 m

0.1mm

1mm

10-1

100

5mm

n=5
n=3
n=2
n=1

3.5

2.5
2
1.5

Invisible to the naked eye

3

Imperceptible to the casual observer

4

1
0.5
0
10-2

Crack Width in mm
Figure 2.2.2. Relationship between the width of cracks (c),the number of cracks (n) and
the damage parameter Ψ.

While the weighted average may give the impression that the intensity
parameter would decrease if a second narrow crack appears, the inclusion of n
and the selected exponents makes sure that additional cracks always leads to
increased damage. For example, if a single crack of 1 mm width (Ψ=2) is joined
by a second crack of 0.1 mm width that has just become visible, the resulting Ψ
is 2.2. If the second crack is much longer, however, then it is theoretically
possible for the value of Ψ to decrease. This situation is unlikely since the
aggravation of damage is usually associated with an increase in width and
length of all visible cracks. Additional discussion about the meaning and
limitations of Ψ are examined in the following sections.
In Figure 2.2.3 examples of a masonry façade with various crack patterns are
given. This illustrates the types of crack combinations that lead to typical Ψ
values.

35

Ψ=0.9

Ψ=1.0

Ψ=1.3

Ψ=1.8

Ψ=2.0

Ψ=2.3

Ψ=2.5

Ψ=3.0

Ψ=3.8

Figure 2.2.3. Examples of a masonry façade displaying cracks (width; length in
millimetres) and their evaluated Ψ value.

2.2.4. Thresholds for Ψ, ∆Ψ, and Their Meaning
Ψ is a continuous damage parameter, which means that any positive rational
scalar or number between zero and infinite are defined. In practice, values of Ψ
above 9 are meaningless as masonry structures reach the near-collapse state at
Ψ=8 when cracks are the result of in-plane damage on structural walls. In fact,
while cracks are a good measure of light damage for DS1 or DS2, as damage
increases, cracks will fail to capture the level of safety of a structure, usually
better associated with its remaining capacity. For lateral loads, the inter-storey
drift is a good predictor of the remaining structural capacity, for example. This
means that values of Ψ above 4, no longer related to light damage, are not
very useful.
Despite its continuous nature, it is still convenient to set thresholds for Ψ
relating it to various categories of damage. First, Ψ=1 is perhaps the most
useful threshold. It distinguishes between invisible or visible damage. In the
most strict analyses of crack-based damage on masonry, potentially-visible
damage is the absolute lowest threshold. Because, multiple cracks may be
involved, these thresholds can go up to a value of 1.4, as is presented in Table
2.2.2, comparing traditional damage states (EMS) and the damage categories
initially set by Burland et.al. (1977). Next is the value for Ψ=2 which
corresponds to cracks that usually require (or are) repaired. Finally, a value of
Ψ=3.5, with cracks in the order of 5mm determine the end of light damage.

Chapter 2

Damage metric for masonry cracking

36

Chapter 2

Additionally, while Ψ is meant to characterise crack-based masonry damage
associated with “light damage”, experiments on masonry walls, tested until
near-collapse, help link Ψ to the remaining damage states, DS3 - DS5. This is
detailed in Table 2.2.2 which also presents descriptors for Ψ with the values
commonly associated to them. Values of Ψ below 1 are difficult to measure in
practice since cracks cannot be observed. However, strain gauges, crack
meters, cameras and other sensors will be able to capture these low values.
Also, Ψ can be used to evaluate damage in numerical models, too. In this
context, any value of Ψ can be measured. These invisible values are useful for
determining the initial condition of a pre-damaged structure where Ψ0 is later
affected by a subsequent action.
Table 2.2.2. Comparison Damage States and damage levels with approximate values of
Ψ.
State

DS0

Level

DL0

Ψ

Ψ< 1

Aproximate
Crack
Width

Imperceptible
cracks

DS1
DL1

DL2

DS2
DL3

1 < Ψ < 1.4 1.5 < Ψ < 2.4 2.5 < Ψ < 3.4
up to
0.1mm

up to 1mm

up to 5mm

DL4
Ψ > 3.5
5 to
15mm

The association of Ψ with the damage states (DS) from the EMS scale is fuzzy.
This is because the EMS scale is not entirely crack-based. A similar issue occurs
when comparing Ψ to the scale of Burland. Since the latter is not entirely
objective, the separation between grades and Ψ is not always fixed. For this
reason, certain values of Ψ could be linked to multiple DSs. Furthermore, DS1
and DS2 have been classified into ‘light damage’. Thus, the lower threshold for
the beginning of light damage is also unclear. The strict definition is that the
just-visible cracks mark the initiation of light damage (Ψ=1), as adopted in
Table 2.2.3. However, a more practical threshold above a Ψ of 1 can also be
set; see Section 3.2.
The higher damage states, linked to stability and near-collapse, are associated
with sudden failures, large shear deformations, crushing and compressive
failures, large amounts of debris, partial collapses, connections failures, and
sudden increases in drift, for example. Some, like a reduction in a lateral or
vertical force or displacement capacity, are not visible. These indicators offer a
more reliable link to structural damage than Ψ.

Damage metric for masonry cracking

37

Table 2.2.3. Overview of the scalar value of Ψ for SLS (black) and ULS (grey). ULS values
are derived from experimental results, see Chapter 3.
Values of
Ψ

Description

Representative
Crack Width

Ψ=0

No damage

N.A.

Ψ ≈ 0.5

Invisible damage

< 0.1 mm

Ψ ≥ 1.0

Just-visible light damage

> 0.1 mm

Ψ ≥ 2.0

Easily-observable light
damage

> 1 mm

Ψ ≥ 2.5

Costly light damage

> 2 mm

DS1 or DS2

Ψ ≥ 3.0

End of light damage

> 4 mm

DS2

Ψ ≥ 4.5

Severe.
No longer light damage,
usage of a different damage
metric is recommended.

> 10 mm

DS3

Ψ ≥ 6.0

Very Severe

> 25 mm

DS4

Ψ ≥ 8.0

Near Collapse

> 50 mm

DS4 or DS5

DS0

DS1

L
i
g
h
t
D
a
m
a
g
e
S
t
a
b
i
l
t
y

Initial Damage: Ψ0
The term Ψ-zero refers to a value of Ψ at the beginning of the assessment. It is
used to contrast an initial condition to a later one. When considering a
situation with existing yet invisible crack-based damage, a value of Ψ0 ≈ 0.5
can be assumed. This is typically sufficient for cracking to have developed (see
2.1.3: Fracture Mechanics) but is far from visible damage.
Increase in Damage: ∆Ψ
The continuous nature of Ψ is meant to give it the ability to accurately track
small increases in damage. In fact, in the study of damage aggravation, more
important than measuring Ψ is the evaluation of ∆Ψ or the increase in damage.
For ∆Ψ, thresholds can also be set. In particular, the question of when does an
increase in damage become noticeable or significantly increase the cost of
repair, is paramount.

ΔΨ = Ψ − Ψ0

Damage Increase: Equation 2.5.

Where Ψ0 is the initial damage condition and ∆Ψ is the increase in damage.
Because of the power law of Equation 2.4, the importance of the absolute

Chapter 2

Damage State

38

Chapter 2

damage increase remains constant within the light damage range (Ψ0<3); this
means that an increase of ∆Ψ of 0.2 for instance, will be equally noticeable and
affect the cost of repair in a similar manner for a case of Ψ0=1 or Ψ0=2. In both
situations, a ∆Ψ of 0.2 represents a measurable increase in damage and is used
as the lower threshold for quantifying an aggravation in crack-based damage.
Note that “noticeable” is used in this work as an indication of whether a casual
observer would perceive the damage or its increase.
Table 2.2.4. Overview and thresholds for ∆Ψ when Ψ0 ≥ 1.0 for noticeable increases of
damage. *Note: photographs and measurements are considered to include simple tools
as those available to a common observer. Hence, these threshold are not applicable for
monitoring.
Values of ∆Ψ

Description

∆Ψ < 0.1

Hardly noticeable

0.2 > ∆Ψ ≥ 0.1

Only noticeable in comparison photographs/measurements*

0.5 > ∆Ψ ≥ 0.2

Above 0.2 an increase in damage becomes visible for recurrent
observers

1 > ∆Ψ ≥ 0.5

Evident damage increase, significant influence in the cost of repair

∆Ψ ≥ 1

Increase in damage contributes most to repair cost and detectability;
fully attributable damage

These thresholds are meant as a guide of what sort of damage increase would
be noticeable to the occupants of a building. Since some building users are
more careful than others and will employ photographs or even measuring
rulers to monitor damage, it is clear that the thresholds must present averages
or expected values from which it is sensible to consider that an aggravation of
damage would be perceived.
In this light, it must be said that the thresholds were not set on the basis of an
extensive survey of what building users would notice. The aspect of time would
complicate such a survey besides the fact that the survey would be biased if
participants were conscious about monitoring damage aggravation.
Instead, the thresholds come from three sources: 1) the increases of damage
reported with the assumption that if small increases are never reported it is also
because they could not be detected. The database for this, in any case, is quite
limited [8]. 2) the relationships between width and length observed from the
experiments. This is well documented in Chapter 3. And 3), a study of many
hypothetical cases varying crack width, length and number, in combination with
engineering judgement to conclude where the thresholds should lay. Some
examples appear in Appendix B. Note that the detectability of an increase in

Damage metric for masonry cracking

39

length is linked to the local increase in width at the crack tip. This means that
the length of the crack is determined by a lower threshold of what width can be
observed.

The relative increase, ∆Ψ/ Ψ or ∆Ψ/ Ψ0, can also be used to characterise
damage aggravation. However, because Ψ is based on a power law, the
importance of relative increases are dependent on the starting value of Ψ. For
example, an increase of 50% when Ψ0=0.5 doesn’t reach visible damage; but,
if Ψ0=2, the increase of ∆Ψ=1 is significant. For this reason, the r∆Ψ is only
sporadically used, with a preference instead to the absolute ∆Ψ as presented in
Table 2.2.4.

2.2.5. Agglomeration of Ψ
The Ψ parameter has been mainly developed to assess the progression of
damage on a certain specimen or between identical specimens. However,
sometimes different walls or structures would like to be compared to each
other to determine which presents lower or higher damage. In this case, it is
convenient to express a relative version of Ψ based on the surface area of the
masonry:

Ψ′i = Ψi ⋅

Ai ⋅ ζi
Ā

Equation 2.6.

Where Ai is the surface area of the wall i, A̅ is the mean area of the walls
considered and Ψ’ is the relative Ψ. Additionally, if the walls are of different
masonry material, the unitary cost of repair ζ can be included in the
comparison.
Furthermore, if a structure where each wall is monitored separately wants to be
characterised with a single value of Ψ, the damage in the N walls can be
accounted as:

Ψ̄ =

1 N
Ψi ⋅ Ai
AT ∑
i=1

Equation 2.7.

Where Ψ̅ is the mean Ψ value and AT is the sum of the surface areas. However,
Ψ can be directly determined as the sum of all cracks in the structure.

2.2.6. Perception of Damage and Ψ
Two identical masonry walls subjected to similar actions will be similarly
damaged; however, if one wall is finished with a plaster that is old and stiff
while the other has walls covered in flexible wallpaper, the former will display
any crack prominently, while the latter will hide cracks. The first wall will be

Chapter 2

Relative Increase in Damage: r∆Ψ

40

Chapter 2

perceived to be more damaged than the second one. This is the perceived
damage state which may differ from the actual damage state. The actual
damage state will determine the damage progression behaviour of the
masonry and is referred to as the physical damage. This work focuses on
physical damage and observes the processes that lead to it, but it is still
important to acknowledge that damage can be subjective and that certain
combinations of architectural building parameters will lead to more reported
damage. Understanding how damage is likely to be perceived also gives
insight into overall damage conditions. Furthermore, in some cases, reporting
the estimated perceived damage may be closer to observations from field
cases than the calculated damage, especially if the damage report did not
follow an objective procedure.
The following is an empirical proposal of how and which parameters relating to
the aesthetic and architectural disposition of the structure, as well as the
situation in which damage was observed, may affect the way in which damage
is perceived.
k

ψ = Ψ3

Equation 2.8.

Where:
ψ is the perceived damage intensity (lowercase ψ)
Ψ is the damage parameter measuring physical damage (uppercase Ψ)
k is the average of the empirically-determined influence parameters (on a scale
of 1 to 5 with a median of 3) for various category as shown in Table B.2. These
values have been determined using expert judgment and interviews with
experts in the assessment of masonry damage in the Netherlands; hence,
additional, quantitative analyses need to be done to better substantiate them.
They are presented here as an illustration of the approach and exemplification
of the relationship between actual damage and its perception. It is possible to
include as many categories as deemed relevant into the evaluation of the
perception of damage. Additionally, the relation can be inverted to try to
estimate the actual damage of a structure from a study case report. In the
former case, an estimation of how damage will be perceived can be inferred
from a numerical model, while in the latter, a more accurate estimation of
damage can be registered from an uncertain field report.
The definitions for Ψ are gathered in Appendix B.

Damage metric for masonry cracking

41

2.3. Utilisation: Examples of Application of Ψ

To determine Ψ, cracks need to be measured and identified. Work was
conducted for this purpose. However, crack surveillance techniques or crack
identification procedures are not the focus of this chapter. These are
mentioned where necessary but are not explained in detail. The reader is
referred to the cited works and related publications.

2.3.1. Ψ in Experiments surveyed with Digital Image Correlation
Photogrammetry techniques can be used to automatically detect cracks
(Mojsilović et al. 2016, Dhanasekar et al. 2019, Tung et al. 2008). Digital Image
Correlation (DIC) has been increasingly used in laboratories to measure
displacement and strains on small samples or large surfaces where the use of
multiple sensors is inconvenient (Laurin et al. 2012, Ramos et al. 2015).
However, strains are not easily linked to cracks. Usually, measured strains are
smoothed out over a certain surface to correct for noise and the relatively low
resolution of DIC. The smooth strains are thus not representative of the discrete
cracks appearing on masonry specimens.
As part of the experimental validation of the usage of the Ψ parameter, cracks
had to be automatically detected to assess the progression of damage over
hundreds of loading cycles [4]. The setup thus allows for the observation of the
initiation and, most importantly, the progression (in width and in length) of
cracks visible and invisible to the naked eye over the entire surface of a fullscale wall. In Experimental
this manner,
measuring system is compatible with the
Testthe
Results
definition for Ψ (Equation 2.4).

Chapter 3

Figure 2.3.1. Laboratory wall specimen (3.1m x 2.7m) overlaid with the horizontal
displacement field obtained with DIC during testing of a lateral top displacement inplane. Right, zoomed-in corner of the wall depicting the speckle pattern used for DIC.

Chapter 2

This section is about the utilisation of Ψ in three distinct examples: one about
physical experiments, another about numerical models, and a third about
predictions. These illustrate different aspects about the usage of Ψ.

42

Chapter 2

Brief Description of DIC Tool
Figure 2.3.1 presents an example of a 2.7m-tall masonry wall covered in a
speckle pattern. In Figure 2.3.1, the displacement field reveals the presence of
cracks. The DIC pattern on the wall in combination with the camera allowed for
the monitoring of the full displacement field of the wall in a grid with a spacing
of 2.7x2.7 mm and a precision of 20 µm, comprising over 1.2 million
measurement (or grid) points. Images were taken at precise time-points
throughout the test. The accuracy of the setup allows to detect displacements
as small as a fifth of the threshold set for visible cracks (Ψ=1); this is herein
considered as high-resolution.
The raw or unmodified displacement field, acquired by a DIC-algorithm using
small subsets (of approximately 10 pixels) to avoid smoothing the displacement
values, can be scanned for discontinuities above a certain threshold; large
groups of discontinuities are likely to correspond to cracks. The relative
displacement between one side of the discontinuity and the other corresponds
to the width of the crack. Figure 2.3.2 presents the result of this operation
where each crack is automatically characterised in width and length. Note that
the wall specimens of both figures are not the same. While many authors utilise
strains to map cracks, strains would need to be integrated over a crackbandwidth to be able to output the crack width and length, and can thus only
be used in an illustrative manner. The detection and characterisation of
discontinuities, on the other hand, is better tailored to obtain the crack
kinematics. Gehri et al. (2020) specify this approach in detail. The resulting data
can provide an in-depth look at crack progression; Figure 2.3.3 presents the
crack width at the centreline of the crack over multiple experimental cycles. It
can be observed that the crack grows in width and in length throughout the
experiment. The centreline is captured automatically by following the trend of
the maximum width over the crack. It can also be seen that the DIC output is
not free from noise; however, with thousands of measurement points over the
crack, reasonable values can be computed.
Cracks and Ψ from Experiments
For each frame in the experiment, with crack widths and lengths determined,
the Ψ value is computed as in Figure 2.3.4. This illustrates how Ψ increases
throughout the experiment, even during cycles of equal amplitude.
While the algorithm employed here was custom-written to detect cracks with
the highest accuracy possible, commercial DIC tools have started to implement
crack-oriented solutions and it remains convenient to tailor solutions to specific

Damage metric for masonry cracking

Part 1

43

experiments (Gehri et al., 2020). These analysis tools will allow for an easier
characterisation of light damage in masonry.

art

Crack Locations - Comp46
2

Crack

Width (µm)

Length (mm)

1

750

980

2

285

866

3

361

1278

4

375

445

5

676

1052

6

482

1330

1
1.5
1
0.5

4

5
3

2

Chapter 2

6

0 Figure 2.3.2. Detected cracks in DIC data of a laboratory masonry wall. Ψ=2.2.
150
0.5

Crack Width in mm

Comp46 - Second Part
0.4

2

0.3

1.5

0.2

1

0.1
0

0.5

200

400
600
Distance from crack mouth in mm

800

1000

0
Figure 2.3.3. Crack width against crack length
as measured by the centreline of the
300
330
crack, for numerous test cycles. The slope of the lines is linked to the “tapered-ness” of
the cracks. The length is measured over the path of the crack; together with its width, a
3D path emerges, as plotted in the top right corner.

270

es

art

2.5
Value
Normalised Cycle Amplitude

2

2

1.5
1

or Amplitude

1.5

1

0.5

0

-0.5

0.5

-1
1

30

60

90

120

150

180

210

Cycles

Figure 2.3.4. Development of the Ψ value throughout testing of a wall indicating also

0
150 the progression of the amplitude of the applied lateral top displacement.

- Comp46 - Second Part
2

44

Chapter 2

2.3.2. Damage Aggravation by ∆Ψ in Finite Element Models
The Ψ damage parameter is not only useful in laboratory settings but can also
be employed for the analysis of damage in numerical models that output crack
width. Finite-element-method models are particularly well suited when a
continuum material model produces crack strains or crack width at the
integration point level. These types of models are explored more extensively in
following chapters but a brief example is presented in this subsection.
Numerical models are capable of analysing the effect of several, subsequent
actions. For example, a masonry façade can be subjected to a temperature
gradient that leads to stresses due to hindered deformations; these stresses
can result in cracks. Subsequently, on the cracked or pre-damaged model other
actions can be analysed, for instance, deformations originating from the soil or
vibrations from various sources. Then, the change in the existing cracks can be
measured as ∆Ψ. Since the damage of both actions leads to cracks, and
damage is measured from these cracks, the damage scale is compatible with
this multi-hazard analysis [multi hazards paper]. In fact, any crack-causing action
(see Table 2.1.1), can be progressively evaluated in a numerical model to
determine the damage contribution of each action.
Evaluating models using specific values of Ψ0 can help quantify the effect of
the existing damage on the later damage increase. For example, a certain
façade displaying cracks amounting to Ψ0=1 may respond differently to
vibrations than the same façade with Ψ0=1.5. Similarly, identical façades with
equal initial damage intensity (Ψ0=1 for instance) yet caused by different
actions, may also lead to a different damage aggravation when subjected to
the same action. Using quantifiable values of Ψ0 and ∆Ψ helps to objectively
assess the influence of initial damage.
Analogously, numerical models, where cracks can be measured and quantified
with Ψ, can be used to investigate the influence of other parameters like the
strength of the material. Regardless of the number or the location of cracks, if
two otherwise identical models are simulated only varying the Young’s moduli
of the masonry for example, a difference in Ψ or ∆Ψ will serve as a measure for
a sensitivity analysis. In this manner, variations in material strength, geometrical
features such as wall size, thickness, or dimensions of the openings, intensity or
repetition of the actions, etc. can be quantified with Ψ.
In Figure 2.3.5 an example of damage aggravation using a FEM model is
presented. Here, the façade of a masonry monument is modelled and first
subjected to a differential settlement that results in a Ψ value of 1.1. Then, a
vibration corresponding to a Dutch earthquake with an intensity of 32 mm/s is

45

applied at the base and cracks are seen to propagate at the corners of the
windows. The resulting value of Ψ is 2.0 thus representing an aggravation of
∆Ψ=0.9. It is common to observe existing cracks becoming wider and longer,
and other cracks appearing at new locations, in particular, at the corners of
windows and doors where stresses localise. The model exemplified is treated in
more detail in [14] where the influence of the source of the vibration is
explored using Ψ. Similarly, [9, 22] investigates variations in the type and
intensity of the soil deformations.
a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

f)

Figure 2.3.5. Example of a monumental façade (a) in the Oude Ijsselstreek, the
Netherlands, from 1873 modelled with FEM (b), displaying the principal crack width
output Ecw1 (c, e), and automatically interpreted to determine the individual cracks and
their characteristics to calculate Ψ (d, f). In a first analysis (c), the façade model is
subjected to a soil deformation underneath its foundation, which cases Ψ=1.1. Later,
the model is subjected to vibrations that cause a ∆Ψ=0.9. Images adapted from [20].

Chapter 2

Damage metric for masonry cracking

6 km Bfr

46

Latitude

53°20'N

Chapter 2

2.3.3. Predictions with Ψ
53°10'N
When the relationship
between building features, the intensity of an action,
and the resulting Ψ is known, Ψ can be used to predict the probability of
damage. For the case of seismic vibrations and clay-brick walls, [7] established
a function that based5 km
on a number
=1 for of=0parameters like the wall5 kmgeometry,
=1 for
f
0
f
5
mi
5 mi the initial
masonry material strength, the soil type underneath the foundation,
damage Ψ0, the type of earthquake, and its intensity and repetition, would
c.
d.
produce a continuous value
of ∆Ψ. Associating probabilistic distributions
to
each of these parameters allows for a calculation of the probability of Ψ or the
building fragility in terms of Ψ in response to the earthquake intensity. If a
relationship between Ψ and cost is defined, the expected cost for specific
53°20'N
earthquake scenarios can be studied.

0

=0.5

OpenStreetMap

Latitude

Other damage scales can also be used for this purpose, but the continuous
nature of Ψ and the summation of damage into a single scalar where the
meaning of ∆Ψ is independent of the initial intensity, makes Ψ particularly well
suited, especially
for light damage. Figure 2.3.6 presents such an example,
53°10'N
where contour lines are drawn on a map of the north of the Netherlands
representing the exceedance probability for Ψ=1 due to past earthquake
vibrations on clay-brick masonry walls. This type of quantification will be
5 km
5 km
=1.5 for
=0.5
=1.5 for
treated in more detail in
following
f chapters.
0
f
5 mi

OpenStreetMap

a.
e.

Probability 1 in

5 mi

0

=1.0

b.
f.

10000
1000
100
10
2
6 km Bfr

Latitude
Latitude

53°20'N
53°20'N

53°10'N
53°10'N

5 km
km
5
5 mi
mi
5

6°30'E

c.

=1 for

=0

=2.5 for 0 0 =1.0
ff
6°40'E

6°50'E

Longitude

OpenStreetMap
OpenStreetMap

7°E

5 km
km
5
5 mi
mi
5

6°30'E

=1 for

6°40'E

d.

Figure 2.3.6. Example of a map where the probability of damage due to past
earthquake events is quantified with Ψ. This map considers a history of multiple events;
see Chapter 6.

Latitude

53°20'N

=0.5

=2.5 for 0 0 =1.5
ff
6°50'E

Longitude

Damage metric for masonry cracking

47

2.4. Discussion
So as ‘perceived damage’, transitory damage, may differ from a structure's
actual damage level. Transitory damage reflects a structure's state at a specific
time and might not align with its state at the time of observation. For instance,
during an earthquake, cracks of 1mm may appear at the moment of maximum
deformation but partially close by the end of the event. The proposal in this
study is that damage is analogous to transitory or transient damage, a
conservative approach suitable for evaluating light damage. A few arguments
are listed:
Firstly, narrower cracks (DS1) in light damage scenarios, unlike larger cracks, are
less likely to close due to the roughness of the crack interface. Cracks through
bricks or finished walls are irreversible and remain visible.
Secondly, unreinforced masonry, designed without considering tensile strength,
usually lacks forces to keep cracks open. However, additional stresses, such as
hygro-thermal expansion, can cause cracks to remain open. Unlike laboratory
experiments with restitutory forces, real cases may lack such forces, keeping
cracks open.
Thirdly, in real cases, transitory damage is observable and easier to detect than
hardly-noticeable residual damage in lightly damaged instances. Laboratory
experiments yield higher transitory than residual damage, making it
challenging to determine the actual residual damage in real cases with
complex interactions.
Fourthly, analysing a combination of actions or repeated actions requires
considering the true damaged state revealed by the maximum transitory state.
This state accurately represents the structure's loss of strength and response to
subsequent excitations.
Fifthly, when assessing structural design adherence to regulations, drift limits
focus on maximum displacement rather than residual displacement. Evaluating
a structure's final damage state commonly involves looking at its maximum
transitory state.
Therefore, this work consistently uses transitory damage to refer to damage.
While it's expected that for light damage, transitory damage closely aligns with
final damage, it's noted that the final damage measure employed is slightly
lower than the transitory damage.

Chapter 2

2.4.1. Transitory and Residual Damage

48

Chapter 2

2.4.2. Summary of Advantages, Disadvantages and Limitations
Throughout this chapter, the working of Ψ has been detailed. Some
advantages of using Ψ must be apparent, specifically because of its definition.
First, Ψ is always objective, meaning that the value computed will be the same
for a specific case. Similarly, it is quantitative, without the use of descriptions
to determine damage grades. Second, consolidating damage into a single
scalar makes comparisons and predictions, via surrogate models for instance,
more straightforward. This is useful when crack-based damage comprises
multiple cracks. Moreover, Ψ is linked to established damage scales based on
crack width, which reinforces its validity. Third, Ψ is continuous which makes
small changes measurable - though this is more applicable to predictions than
practical measurements on masonry walls. Fourth, the values used for the scale
of Ψ are intuitive, with a value of 1 being assigned to the start of visible
damage. Similarly, discussing Ψ0, or an initial state, is clear, and, ∆Ψ can be
used to express changes in damage. Finally, the relationship between Ψ and
the detectability and cost of repair of the damage, makes Ψ a practical
parameter.
The simplicity of Ψ, however, is a tradeoff of certain capabilities, i.e.
disadvantages. First, when damage is consolidated into a single scalar, the
picture of damage is lost; whether cracks appeared underneath windows or at
corners cannot be retrieved from the Ψ scalar. Second, Ψ includes the length
of cracks as a weighting parameter. Some changes such as the increase in
length of one narrow crack while observing no changes in any other cracks, will
produce an unexpected change in the value of Ψ. This is an unrealistic situation
for which the parameter has not been calibrated. Such changes, however, have
a small influence in the value of Psi and will be limited to a centesimal change.
This leads to a loss of precision, but helps to realise that attempting to capture
aesthetic damage with a high precision is not sensible.
Moreover, a few words about the influence of crack length in the formulation of
Ψ must be said. In a wall with multiple cracks, if all parameters remain the same
and only the length of the cracks increase, Ψ might not change. The
formulation of Ψ could be adapted to include this effect, but this would make it
more complex, defeating part of its purpose. Instead, one must remember that
Ψ is supposed to be a practical formulation and does not need to conform to
theoretical edge cases. Indeed, in experiments of walls and analyses of field
reports, cracks never only grow in length. In a tapered crack, an increase in
length is also related to an increase in width. In a uniform crack, an increase in
length is not possible. Furthermore, when discussing an increase in Ψ (∆Ψ), an
increase in length is inevitably linked to an increase in width because the

49

detectability of the longer crack is based on the local increase in width at the
crack tip. One could observe that the crack became longer because the tip
became wider. In this light, the noticeability of a crack width increasing (as per
Table 2.2.4) is governing. Note that this is applicable for cracks in masonry (or
concrete) where the crack tip related to a non-zero crack strain is invisible to
the naked eye. For a crack to growth in visible length without increasing in
width, it must be sustaining a transition from a tapered crack to a uniform
crack; that is, the slope of the crack width over the length is diminishing. This is
not measured by Ψ but could be included in a different parameter; this is also
discussed in the next section.
In sum, when discussing crack length, it must be realised that Ψ is a crack-width
based parameter linked to the early damage scale formulations drawn from
Burland et al. (1974) where crack length was not present. In this sense, the
influence of length, both in damage intensity and aggravation, will be limited.
In this light, the parameter needs always to be evaluated within realistic
scenarios. For example, masonry walls are subjected to a limited number of
cracks: attempting to evaluate Ψ with a high number of cracks is hence
unrealistic. Moreover, since the parameter is related to the ease of repair, which
in turn is related to the width of the cracks and not to their length, as was
shown in Table 1, an extension in crack length will not necessarily lead to an
increase in Ψ; in masonry, a significant increase in length is accompanied by a
realistic increase in width, which is then reflected by a higher Ψ value.
In a structure, there are active and inactive cracks. Some cracks open and
others unload; cracks often also localise into a single cracks. For seasonal
temperature changes, for instance, the term of ‘breathing cracks’ is also
employed. Transitory damage has also been discussed. Clearly, Ψ is poorly
suited to capture the importance of this damage. For both experiments and
numerical models, there are potential solutions such as considering the
maximum cumulative crack width when evaluating Ψ. However, these become
troublesome when assessing ∆Ψ.

2.4.3. Potential Future Improvements
The proposed implementation of Ψ is not the only way in which to objectively
measure crack-based damage in masonry. As stated in the preceding
subsection, the parameter has several limitations such as the limited influence
of the crack length, the lack of consideration for the crack shape or location, or
the degree to which a crack is active. These specific limitations are brought to
mind because they could be amended in a second version of the parameter or
perhaps in a more complex cousin parameter. Indeed, considering any of these

Chapter 2

Damage metric for masonry cracking

50

Chapter 2

inclusions would make assessing Ψ significantly more complex which would
partly defeat its purpose; nevertheless, let us consider these potential revisions.
Firstly, to address the low effect of the length, or the fact that increases in
length without increases in width may lead even to a reduction in width, or
even in situations where the maximum crack width is difficult to determine, it
could be useful to integrate the crack width over the length of the crack.
Alternatively, the cumulative sum of crack width for each crack could be
considered.
Secondly, the shape of the crack, whether it is tapered or uniform, would be
implicitly included in such a width integration over the length, but could also
be explicitly incorporated as a stand-alone variable in the formulation. This
would emphasise the distinction between the crack shapes. Similarly, crack
opening and crack sliding, so the local components of the displacement
relative to the crack path, could be individually weighted or included in the
formulation such that shear cracks, for example, have a higher effect on the
damage intensity. This would incorporate the fact that transitory damage for
shear cracks is closer to the maximum damage detected while flexural cracks
with pure opening are more likely to fully close in a way that maximum damage
differs from transitory damage.
Thirdly, the location of the crack could be considered. Two factors could be
included in a revised formulation: the distance of the local crack width to an
edge in the geometry of the wall or façade, and the location of the crack
relative to the masonry (bed, or head joint, or brick). The latter would be
weighted heavily as having a higher contribution to the damage intensity.
Similarly, the further a crack is located from any edge, the more important it is
for damage. In this way, shear or body cracks could be given a higher
importance.
While these improvements could be included in a straightforward manner
within an automatic detection and formulation, they would require significant
more inputs in situations where such a measurement system is not available.
Moreover, the precise way in which all these inputs would be put together is
not simple. Extensive studies would be required to account for all the correct
effects and verify that none is being considered twice. A data-driven approach,
perhaps empirically determined with a machine-learning model, would be a
good alternative.
With the goal of formulating an uncomplicated damage intensity parameter,
the Ψ parameter neglects many of these possible effects and focuses on
providing a single scalar as a summary of damage.

Damage metric for masonry cracking

51

The damage parameter was conceived to measure small increases in damage
objectively. Additionally, a lower threshold from which damage becomes
measurable was determined. These two goals are mostly useful for modelling
and laboratory cases where small damage increases can be measured, even
before damage becomes visible. These small increases, perhaps imperceivable
in real situations, are key in drawing relationships between modelling variations
and damage.
Yet, Ψ can also be used in real life cases, though less so in individual cases. The
predictive power of Ψ, to categorise the probability of damage for typologies
of buildings, cannot be applied at the individual level since the precise history
and context of a building, usually unknown, will affect its damage
development. Moreover, from Table 2.2.4 it follows, that small increases in
damage (∆Ψ) will not be measurable in the field unless sensitive sensors have
been left in place.
Other practical limitations are sometimes encountered. For example, how to
determine Ψ when a single crack spans multiple walls around a building corner
or over different types of material can represent confusing scenarios (see
section 2.2.5). Additionally, field surveys to evaluate cost of repairs should be
exhaustive and summarising damage into a single value (Ψ) is usually over
simplified. In these cases, Ψ could be used to give a comparison to an earlier
measurement epoch.

2.5. Conclusions about Ψ, ∆Ψ, Ψ0
The following conclusions incorporate the essential aspects of the Ψ parameter
and its application in damage assessment in masonry:
Objective Measurement of Damage: Ψ offers an objective way to measure
damage, ensuring consistent results regardless of the observer's experience or
the measurement tools used. This objectivity is crucial in fields such as damage
assessment and loss prediction.
Quantitative Nature: Unlike scales that rely on descriptions or limited
categories, the Ψ parameter is quantitative. It uses measurable factors such as
crack width, number of cracks, and crack length, making the assessment
process more precise and less subjective. Existing approaches typically employ
only crack width.
Continuous Scale: Ψ operates on a continuous scale. This feature allows for
the easy measurement of both absolute values and incremental changes in
damage, facilitating a nuanced understanding of damage progression.

Chapter 2

2.4.4. Relevance of Ψ for Modelling and for Real Life Uses

52

Chapter 2

Linked to Detectability and Cost of Repair: Ψ is directly related to the
detectability of damage and the ease (and cost) of repair. This connection
makes it a practical tool for assessing the impact and severity of damage in
masonry.
Wide Applicability: The metric is applicable to a range of damage types,
including mining-induced damage from both dynamic soil movements like
earthquake vibrations and static soil movements like subsidence. It is also
useful in finite element and other models, laboratory tests with digital image
correlation or other crack registration techniques, and real cases where cracks
are monitored with the naked eye, existing crack measuring apparatus, or
innovative photographic techniques.
Quantification of Damage Increase (∆Ψ) and Relative Increase (∆Ψ/Ψ0): The
Ψ parameter enables the objective quantification of damage increase,
including the relative increase. For example, it can express damage increase as
a percentage, such as “an increase of 10% in damage.” This aspect is
particularly relevant for assessing cumulative damage (e.g., earthquake
damage on top of pre-existing damage from settlements) and repetitive
damage (e.g., multiple earthquakes over time), which is crucial in cases like the
Groningen induced seismicity. It should be noted that the advantage of a
simple parameter might underestimate some influences.
In conclusion, the Ψ parameter represents a significant advancement in the
field of damage assessment, offering a reliable, quantitative, and versatile tool
for measuring and understanding crack-based damage in masonry structures
under various conditions and influences.

53

Chapter 3

What does the initiation and propagation of cracks in masonry look like?
Central to this chapter is the focus on the initiation and propagation of cracks
in masonry. The experiments conducted were not only aimed at observing
crack formation but also meticulously designed to track the evolution of these
cracks under various test conditions. This approach provides an in-depth
understanding of the mechanics behind crack formation and growth, a critical
aspect in assessing the light damage of masonry structures.
The experimental campaign began in 2017 and has continued into 2024. It is
not feasible to showcase every experiment in detail. These are treated on early
reports [23, 24], follow-up conference papers [11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 18, 31], and
journal publications [1, 3, 4]. Instead, the work presented in this chapter is
summative; it collects and digests the main observations from these
experiments and draws comparisons between the various tests performed.

Chapter 3

Experiments
to Characterise Cracks

54

Chapter 3

Chapter 3: Table of Contents
The chapter is split into three main sections. A first ‘methods’ sections looks at
the definition and provides an overview of the experiments included herein.
Next, Section 3.2 gathers the ‘results’ of the tests in a summarising manner
under the loupe of crack propagation. Finally, Section 3.3 concludes with a
direct ‘application' of the experiments: drift limits for light damage. The
relationship between drift and Ψ is explored with a classification model and
limits for the lower and upper thresholds of light damage are defined.
3.1. Definition of Experiments to Investigate Light Damage
55
3.1.1. Loading Protocol for Light Damage and Evaluating Repetition .........56
3.1.2. DIC Monitoring System for Experimental Crack-Based Damage .......63
3.1.3. Overview of the Tests Performed from 2017 to 2024 .........................68
3.2. Results from Experiments on Walls and Spandrels
73
3.2.1. Summary of Results on Wall Tests.......................................................73
3.2.2. Summary of Results on Spandrel Tests ...............................................79
3.2.3. Lessons about Crack Propagation ......................................................84
3.2.4. Conclusions about Crack Propagation ...............................................91
3.2.5. Four Ways to Utilise the Experimental Results ...................................92
3.3. Crack-Based Drift Limits from Experimental Results
93
3.3.1. Drift Limits for Light Damage Lacking in Literature ............................93
3.3.2. Repetition in the Loading Protocol of Experiments ............................95
3.3.3. Relationship between Crack-based Damage and in-plane Drift ........96
3.3.4. Discussion and Comparison to Other Drift Limits ............................102
3.3.5. Summary of Drift Limits for Light Damage .......................................104
3.4. Conclusions: Experiments to Understand Crack Behaviour

105

Figure 3.1.1. Left, a wall or component test; right, a spandrel or ‘window bank’ test
which is a modified four-point-bending test with counterweights (CW) and CMOD
control. In both cases, the fired-clay brick specimens are depicted.

Experiments about Cracks

55

Jafari et al., Esposito et al., and Messali et al. (2018) conducted an extensive
multi-scale campaign to characterise the mechanic behaviour of masonry and
assess the safety of masonry structures. The campaign included small scale
‘companion tests’ such as bond-wrench tests to characterise the bond between
masonry units, shear-triplet tests to obtain friction and cohesion values, and
compression tests for stiffness, compressive strength and toughness. Larger
tests like three- or four-point-bending tests in several directions also helped
gather stiffness, flexural, and tensile properties of the masonry investigated.
Moreover, larger masonry components such as walls were tested both in-plane
and out-of-plane (Damiola et al. 2018). Finally, two assemblages representing
the entire structure of a masonry house were also assayed. All tests were quasistatic and under displacement control in order to capture stiffness, strength,
and toughness properties of the masonry. While cracks were observed during
some of these tests, there were no specific efforts to measure them precisely.
Additionally, observed cracks were noted at high values of displacement
corresponding to damage states above DS2; this was sufficient to mark overall
crack patterns and failure mechanisms but not to characterise light damage.
To investigate the very initiation of cracks and monitor their development,
many of these tests were adapted and two vital modifications were conceived:
a loading protocol that slowly started before DS1, and an instrumentation
system capable of measuring and tracking any cracks throughout the tests.
Moreover, the in-plane tests on walls were maintained, slightly varying their
geometry to foment cracks to form around an opening, and the in-plane fourpoint-bending tests were modified to allow for repetition; see Figure 3.1.1 for
the two types of ‘light damage tests’. The adaptations are discussed here.
This section is split into three subsections. Their order is somewhat arbitrary as
all three components are equally important to define the tests needed to
investigate cracking in masonry. Ultimately, it is as follows:
• Section 3.1.1 presents the loading protocol for tests, aimed at generating
light damage. The protocols are exemplified and were developed on the
basis of (preliminary) experiments from the last bullet point.
• Section 3.1.2 details a system that can determine crack initiation and track
crack propagation in experiments. Its capabilities are illustrated with the
results of the experiments, too.
• Finally, section 3.1.3 presents the experiments chose to investigate cracking;
their definition is based on the properties and capabilities of the first two
sections.

Chapter 3

3.1. Definition of Experiments to Investigate Light Damage

56

Chapter 3

3.1.1. Loading Protocol for Light Damage and Evaluating Repetition
The loading protocol is essential during laboratory testing. It defines, together
with the boundary conditions imposed by the test setup, the stresses and
strains to which the samples will be subjected. A first adaptation was to come
up with a loading protocol that allowed to: 1) measure cracks at their initiation,
before they become visible to the naked eye; 2) monitor the propagation of
the cracks as in-plane drift increased and damage intensified; and 3) look at the
effect of repetition of identical loads.
In these tests, displacement-control schemes are employed due to the nonlinear behaviour of damaged specimens. In this manner, it is possible to
capture not only the pre-peak but also the post-peak softening regimes.
Moreover, the enforced displacement changes throughout the test. The initial
stage involves one-way cyclic loading, which prevents stress reversal on crack
surfaces, aiding in understanding crack progression. One-way cyclic loading is
also known as unidirectional or repetitive loading.
This is succeeded by two-way cyclic loading (bi-directional loading) to mimic
seismic excitation and compare crack development in both pre-cracked and
uncracked loading directions, as detailed in Section 3.2. To track material
degradation, cycles of equal displacement amplitude are used, identifying
degradation through reduced force resistance. This results in a portion of the
cycles being identical, leading to a step-wise incremental loading approach.
The cycle number and amplitudes draw partially from Mergos et al. (2014,
2015), which discusses protocols for low-seismicity regions, considering various
structure types and ductility. This is supplemented by Beyer et al. (2015), who
highlight the importance of cycle number in flexural versus shear failure
mechanisms. Studies like Ntinalexis et al. (2022) and Spetzler et al. (2017) note
that structures often endure many small earthquakes, implying the necessity of
numerous small cycles. Conversely, large-amplitude cycles, typical of major
earthquakes near epicentres, are less frequent in distant structures, where
flexural crack propagation is more common (Bal et al., 2018).
Protocol for Walls under Horizontal Shear and Flexure
Figure 2 contrasts Beyer's function with the selected protocols for walls being
tested in flexure where crack formation is mainly due to tensile stresses.
Notably, more cycles are included to reflect multiple earthquake scenarios,
reorganising the cycles to better observe degradation. Bal et al. (2018) mention
that repetitive induced events can lead to cumulative damage, similar to
tectonic earthquakes.

Experiments about Cracks

57

Thus, for lightly damaged, unreinforced masonry structures prone to frequent
small earthquakes, and aiming to study crack mechanics and material
degradation, an incrementally repetitive loading protocol with a high number
of cycles is followed by bi-directional loading. This approach, as shown in
Figure 2, provides a comprehensive understanding of the structural response
under various loading conditions.
For this loading protocol, the very first displacement amplitude needs to be
defined. The remaining steps follow from this first with a constant increase of
25% for normalised amplitudes of 1.0, 1.25, 1.5, 1.75, 2.0, 2.25, and 2.5 for up
to seven steps in the two-way cyclic section of the protocol. The first amplitude
was obtained by monotonically increasing the in-plane drift until a crack width
of 0.1 mm was measured at one of the expected crack locations. For this
purpose, the first wall was instrumented more heavily than subsequent walls
since the location of the first crack was uncertain. The measured crack width
would correspond to a Ψ value of approximately 1; this was later confirmed
with photogrammetry. In fact, subsequent walls could rely entirely on
photogrammetry as an immediate result about crack width was not needed. To
ensure comparability, the drift of the first wall was applied to all other walls; in
most cases this corresponded to a Ψ of 1 though in some cases Ψ would be
slightly lower or higher.

Chapter 3

The initial part of the test diverges from Beyer et al. (2015)'s suggestion. Large
amplitudes, being unidirectional, might cause less damage than bidirectional
amplitudes. Trial tests indicated that very small amplitudes, as per Beyer et al.,
would remain within the elastic region of specimens, deeming them
insignificant. The methodology includes an ‘alpha’ parameter, linked to the
structure's natural period, with a value of 1.5 for periods over 0.3 seconds.

58

Chapter 3

Loading Steps

Normalised
Amplitude

1
=3.0
=1.5

0.5

0

0

2

4

6

8

Steps
Normalised
Amplitude

0

-1

0

5

10

15

20

Cycles
1

Normalised
Amplitude

12

Loading with 3 Cycles per Step

1

25

30

35

Loading with 30 Cycles per Step

0

-1

0

50

100

150

Cycles
1

Normalised
Amplitude

10

200

250

300

Implemented Loading Protocol

0

-1

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Cycles
Figure 3.1.2: Comparison of loading protocols. Includes Beyer et al. (2015)
methodology with 12 steps for two 'alpha' values, 12 steps with 3 cycles each at α=1.5,
adapted loading with 30 cycles per step, and this study's protocol for wall samples with
a total of 310 cycles, combining repetitive (one-way cyclic) and bi-directional (two-way
cyclic) parts.

Experiments about Cracks

59

For the walls tested under a double-clamped boundary condition which
encourages shear failure, a different protocol was conceived. It draws on the
same premises and goals as the light damage protocol (LDP). Beyer’s approach
suggests fewer cycles for walls loaded predominantly in shear, so the number
of key cycles was reduced. At the same time, cracks in shear are characterised
by sliding and opening. When sliding occurs repeatedly, a deformation tends
to accumulate if displacements are not identical in both directions - earthquake
displacements are rarely symmetric. Therefore, it was important to enable this
accumulated sliding behaviour, or ‘walking’, via the loading protocol. To
replicate and study this behaviour, the protocol needed to incorporate this
asymmetry in its loading sequences.
To achieve this, the protocol was informed by an analysis of real earthquake
data, specifically focusing on the Zeerijp earthquake of 2018. The observed
ground motions from this event were asymmetric, with the amplitude in the
positive drift direction being significantly larger than that in the negative
direction, a detail reflected in Figure 3.1.3. This deliberate asymmetry in the
loading cycles was implemented to closely mimic the natural movements of
earthquakes, thereby facilitating a more accurate study of (shear) damage
accumulation under such conditions. The protocol involves conducting a series
of identical loading cycles at each specified drift level, enabling the detailed
tracking of damage development over time. This process is detailed in Figure
3, which presents various key elements of the earthquake and the testing
protocol:
Time Series and Arias Intensity Analysis (3.a) displays the maximum rotated
component of the horizontal acceleration recorded during the Zeerijp
earthquake, alongside the Arias intensity parameter (Arias, 1970). This visual
representation helps in understanding the distribution and intensity of the
earthquake’s energy release. Subfigure 3.b highlights the time frame in which
most of the earthquake’s energy was discharged. Section 3.c shows the ground
displacement that corresponded to the time span of the most intense energy
release.
Part 3.d depicts the asymmetric loading profile used in the protocol, loosely
representing the ground motion patterns observed during the earthquake (3.c).
Incremental Loading Steps (3.e) illustrates how the asymmetric profile is
applied in repeated cycles - 10 per step - across 6 incremental steps. These
steps range from a starting point of 0.27‰ maximum in-plane lateral drift and
increase by 0.065‰ at each step, culminating at 0.69‰. This sequence forms
the Asymmetric Light Damage Protocol (ALDP).

Chapter 3

Asymmetric Protocol for Walls in Horizontal Shear

60

Chapter 3
a. Accelerogram - Zeerijp 2018 (Max Horizontal at BGAR)

1
0.8

0.05

0.6
0

0.4

-0.05
-0.1

0.2

Zeerijp Acceleration
Arias Intensity

0

2

3.5

5

6

8

10

12

Normalised Arias

Acceleration in g

0.1

0

14

Time in s
b. Partial Accelerogram

c. Partial Displacement

0.1

1.5

0.05

1

d. Simplified Cycle Run

1

0
-0.05
-0.1
3.5

4

4.5

5

Protocol

Norm. Amplitude

Disp. in mm

Acceleration in g

Zeerijp Disp.

0.5
0
-0.5
3.5

Time in s

4

4.5

0.5

0

-0.5

5

3 Subcycles = 1 Cycle

Time in s
e. Loading Protocol

0.6

6 Steps of 10 Cycles each, every cycle runs 3 subcycles

0.4
0.2
0

0 cle
y
1C

=1
es
ycl
C
0

1

p
Ste

2

3

4

5

6

Steps

Figure 3.1.3. Overview of Shear Wall Test Protocol: (a) Representative accelerogram
from a Groningen earthquake, focusing on the maximum rotated horizontal component
recorded during the Zeerijp earthquake (January 2018) at the BGAR station. (b) Detailed
view of section (a). (c) Displacement patterns derived from section (b). (d) Simplified
cyclic test derived from displacement patterns in (c). (e) Comprehensive loading
scheme, comprising a sequence of sub-cycles, full cycles, and incremental steps. Over
the six steps, each consisting of ten cycles, there are three subcycles in each cycles and
thus 3x10x6=180 subcycles in total.

Experiments about Cracks

61

The flexure-focused LDP protocol set the initial drift to correspond to a crack
width indicator of Ψ=1. However, unlike the LDP, it was impractical to
instrument the entire surface of the wall to detect crack formation in the ALDP.
Hence, the first wall underwent a series of stepped monotonic tests, with
incremental increases of 0.025‰. Images captured at each step were sent to a
remote server for analysis to look at the onset of cracking. They confirmed that
the first cracks were occurring at the rocking locations (see later Section 3.1.3)
where sensors had been placed; later cracks would also appear in the body of
the shear walls. Based on these sensors, the drift associated with a first crack of
0.1 mm width (Ψ=1) could be set.

Complementary to the wall, laboratory experiments included tests of the
spandrels below window banks. These had the goal of closely monitoring the
propagation of vertical cracks in bending, and were performed monotonically
and repetitively. Opposite to the work of Gattesco et al. (2016), where the
behaviour of a masonry spandrel located between piers on upper floors is
investigated for typical spandrel behaviour during earthquake loading (double
bending and predominantly shear), the window bank tests presented here are
to mimic the behaviour of a spandrel on a ground floor which may have
experienced bending cracks due to actions such as settlements or restrained
shrinkage. It is the repetitive effect of subsequent seismic excitations, and of
seasonal temperature effects, acting on these types of cracks which are of
interest. Furthermore, this configuration is used to calibrate models to the
behaviour of vertical cracks in masonry which were not present in the
experimental full-scale walls as these exhibited mainly horizontal bed-joint
cracks and diagonal stepped cracks, but might have appeared under different
boundary conditions.
The standard four-point-bending test (4PBT) was modified in such a way that a
repeated loading protocol could be applied. Two linked hydraulic jacks were
used and opposite to their application point on the specimen, counterweights
were located.; see earlier Figure 3.1.1. In this manner, there is a restitution
force that helps unload the specimen for repeated cycles. To prevent the
cables from the counterweights interfering with the photogrammetry, the
sample was inverted such that the supports are located in the middle and the
forces are applied at the extremes. A traditional 4PBT mimics a beam where
the supports are at the sides. Placing the supports in the middle also helped to
counteract the effect of gravity attempting to split the (damaged) specimen.
Moreover, the inversion guaranteed that the controlling sensor, monitoring the
Crack Mouth Opening Displacement (CMOD) over the top three vertical joints

Chapter 3

Loading Protocol for Spandrels in Vertical Shear

62

Chapter 3

of the sample, would not be affected if a brick dislodged due to bending nor
would it be damaged if the middle of the sample collapsed downwards as in
the standard 4PBT. To trigger the start of the crack in the centre of the sample,
a notch was introduced by having left a piece of PVC in the central top head
joint at the time of construction. However, the initiation of the crack proved to
be unrelated to the existence or position of the notch, with some cracks
starting on the neighbouring top head joints.
Nonetheless, while this setup allowed for cyclic loading, the loading direction
could not be reversed. This meant that the loading protocol could only be oneway cyclic. Several specimens were tested monotonically first to obtain an idea
about the types of displacements that could be repeated. In the initial
campaign, fourteen spandrel tests were performed of which seven were
monotonic and the remaining were repetitive with three sets of incremental
displacements (Figure 3.4). Three specimens were tested with 10 repetitions
per set, three with 30, and one with 100 repetitions. The amplitude of the steps
was determined based on the results of the monotonic tests such that they
occurred in the non-linear region before the peak force. These were also set
around the threshold for a visible crack at 0.1 mm. The results showed that 30
repetitions were sufficient to observe the force degradation occurring at each
step. Therefore, subsequent tests were conducted with 30 repetitions per step.
Repetitive Loading Scheme
Last step is monotonic until 2mm

CMOD in mm

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Repetitions (Cycles)

Figure 3.1.4. Loading protocol for the window bank tests with 10 repetitions: 3x10.

Experiments about Cracks

63

Besides the protocol designed to investigate light damage, a monitoring
strategy to accurately capture the light damage is needed. This comprises the
monitoring of crack width over the entire length of a crack. Displacement
sensors such as Linear Variable Differential Transformers (LVDTs) can measure
the relative displacement between two points with high accuracy; they would
need to be installed along the entire crack path. This presents several issues:
First, the sensors only measure displacement along their axis, meaning that to
capture sliding as well as opening, at least two sensors are required. Second,
along the crack length, a large number of sensors would need to be placed.
Installing, calibrating, verifying, managing, and reading a large number of
sensors quickly becomes unfeasible; thirty sensors is already a very high
number of connections to be managed at a monitoring station. Third, the
location of the crack is not known a priori. This means that, if all the potential
crack locations are to be surveyed, hundreds of sensors would need to be
used. Moreover, cracks sometimes split bricks, further increasing the number of
sensors. Using traditional displacements sensors to monitor crack propagation
on a full-scale wall is resolutely unmanageable.
Photogrammetry techniques can measure displacements at several points
simultaneously. A digital image is analysed and specific points are tracked over
several images. Before the light damage campaign, photogrammetry was used
to track individual bricks using a few markers per brick. This allowed surveying
the displacement and rotations of bricks. To accurately track invisible cracks
however, many more measuring points are needed. For this purpose, Digital
Image Correlation was used. In DIC, small portions of the image, or subsets,
are used to identify measuring points. To make this process more robust,
specimens are painted with a high-contrast pattern. In Figure 3.5, a wall and a
spandrel specimen are presented. These are equipped with a black-and-white
pattern that when zoomed-in reveals the subset size. Because of the speckle
pattern, each subset of pixels is unique in comparison to its neighbours. The
smaller the subset, the more points on the image can be surveyed, though the
subset should remain sufficiently unique. In the image, the subset on the wall is
5x5 millimetres and only 1.5x1.5 mm for the spandrel. Subsets can also
overlap. Ultimately, a mesh of 2.7x2.7 mm could be surveyed on the face of the
wall. For a single brick of “Waalformaat”, this translates to about 1500 points
for which in-plane horizontal and vertical displacements can be tracked.
Additional points are tracked on the mortar joints. This would be impossible
with LVDTs.

Chapter 3

3.1.2. DIC Monitoring System for Experimental Crack-Based
Damage

64

Chapter 3

Figure 3.1.5 presents an example of a 2.7m-tall masonry wall covered in a
speckle pattern where dots are randomly positioned and randomly vary in
diameter between 4 and 8 pixels. To produce such a pattern, a stencil was
laser-cut from a flexible acrylic plate and was applied on the masonry by
spraying black paint with a compressed-air nozzle, similar to the approach of
Ghorbani et al. (2015). The random pattern is generated with a script that
allowed changing the sizes and distances of the dots. Multiple patterns were
tested on small specimens to determine the best set of parameters. The
pattern allows a (standard) DIC-algorithm to detect the relative displacements
between an initial image and a later image. In Figure 3.1.6, the displacement
field reveals the presence of cracks.
A strong contribution was made in minimising the subset size. The ideal
pattern was optimised such that the subset could be small and unique. This is
coupled to the camera. A camera with a lower resolution requires a larger
pattern; a smaller specimen with the camera closer to it, will require a finer
pattern. See again Figure 3.5. A higher resolution image could be stitched
together from several cameras but problems with positioning of the camera,
the stitching procedure, lens distortion, illumination, etc, quickly make this
alternative undesirable. A single image is preferable. For additional details on
the equipment see Appendix A.1.
The size of the subset is also linked to the post-processing of the images. A
custom program was written to handle small subsets and process them
individually. This is important for monitoring cracks since they represent
discontinuities in the displacement field. Commercial software focuses on
outputting strains which smear out the cracks. Instead, the relative
displacement between two neighbouring subsets can then be seen as a crack.
In this manner, crack widths of 20 µm could already be detected. Since along a
crack path, several measuring points are located, noisy data can be rejected;
see [24.H].
In this way, post-processing was improved in several areas: the correlation
procedure to obtain the displacement field; the presentation of the
displacement field; the detection of cracks; and, the post-processing of crack
information. The correlation procedure has been mentioned in the previous
paragraph and included treating small subsets as independent to obtain clear
displacement discontinuities where cracks could be identified. It also
comprised several programming optimisations to run in modern multi-core
processors which significantly sped up the analysis time.

65

Chapter 3

Experiments about Cracks

Figure 3.1.5. DIC pattern and subset. Top, wall and zoomed-in stencil speckle pattern.
Bottom, spandrel and zoomed-in particle speckle pattern. And bottom right, subset of
10x10 pixels from the image.

Deformed Shapes
To present the results, a deformed shape plot was included. Unlike the current
trend of software to present displacements with a range of colours, the FEM
strategy of magnifying the displacements was adopted. By removing colour,
the results become exceedingly clear. See Figure 6 where two examples are
presented. On the left, a test on a shear wall reveals the body cracks and the
rocking crack at the top right. The test has a double clamped boundary
condition which must ensure that the top and bottom supports remain parallel,
ideally horizontal. Since the wall is stiff and the setup is not infinitely stiff, some
rotation of the boundaries is identified. In fact, the location of the several bolts
anchoring the beams to the setup can be inferred from the deformations.

66

Chapter 3

Figure J.16. Sample 4 als
of the experiment is show
subsequent magnified in
second, and last force int
respectively. The inverse
amount of horizontal exp
slimmer sample) and the
opening. Below, f and g e
the interfaces and the fin

d

f

e

Figure 3.1.6. Deformed shapes. Left, A wall tested in-plane. Right, a compression wallet
with an inverted displacement field: extension shows contraction, opening depicts
crushing.

The right side of Figure 6 shows a compression wallet from the companion
characterisation campaign. This small sample comprises eight courses of bricks.
In the figure, the sample appears elongated. This is because the displacements
have been inverted. In this manner, the crushing at the mortar joints appears as
openings. The restrictive influence of the top and bottom boundaries due to
friction is visible. The Poisson effect, that makes the specimen bulge out
horizontally (displayed as contraction), is thus restricted by the boundaries.

Experiments about Cracks

67

Two important contributions in terms of crack monitoring from the DIC data
were made: characterising cracks and tracking them throughout an experiment.
Crack detection follows directly from the discontinuities in the displacement
field. These identify between which points relative opening or sliding has
occurred. Two ‘cracked’ neighbouring points are assumed to belong to a single
crack. In this sense, what constitutes a crack is harder to define. For people,
intuitively, cracks are easy to identify; this is not as clear for a computer
program. The strategy employed is simple: ‘cracked’ points that are closer than
10 mm, the thickness of the mortar, belong to a single crack. Once the
individual cracks have been identified, they can be characterised. The width
and length of the crack is computed. Together, Ψ can be calculated; see
chapter 2.
Next, cracks over the entire experiment are consolidated. If two individual
cracks exist where later a single crack is present, then they are the same crack.
In this manner, cracks are identified retroactively and a single crack is tracked
from the beginning until the end of the experiment. In this way, the width and
length of individual cracks can be monitored and crack propagation can be
quantified. Figure 7 demonstrates the progression of crack width and length
over several cycles.
Cycle 145

Cycle 172

Cycle 201

Cycle 237

1

2000
Comp55

0.5

1500

Highlighted Cycles
Width
Length

1000
500

0
0

30

60

90

120

150

180

210

0
240

Crack Length in mm

Crack Width in mm

Cycle 86

Cycles

Figure 3.1.7. Example of crack monitoring over cyclic loading, extracted from the cyclic
test of Comp55, observing the crack at the top right corner of the window opening.

Chapter 3

Crack Detection

68

Chapter 3

3.1.3. Overview of the Tests Performed from 2017 to 2024
The tests gathered herein have formed part of several testing campaigns,
though within the ‘light damage campaign’ started in 2017. Throughout these
sub-campaigns, the loading protocol has been mostly consistent as has the
crack measuring system. In addition to Figure 1, Figure 9 shows six different
geometries and masonry brick material tested, namely fired-clay and calciumsilicate brick. The chief geometry difference is the inclusion of an opening for a
window. Moreover, the test differ based on the boundary condition enforced in
the laboratory. Two conditions are possible: cantilever, where the top is allowed
to rotate freely, and fixed, where the top edge is kept parallel to the bottom
edge; see Figure 8 for a scheme of the boundaries and the corresponding
idealised deformation of the walls. The spandrel, or four-point bending test is
also included.
The overview of twenty full-scale wall tests, or component tests, is gathered in
Table 3.1. The result of each individual test will not be presented here due to
brevity. Instead, a comparison of the most relevant results is digested in the
next sections.

Figure 3.1.8. Schematic deformation of the walls and the spandrels. From left to right: a
wall with an opening with a cantilever boundary and with a fixed or double-clamped
boundary; a wall without openings under a fixed boundary; a spandrel under four-point
bending.

Additional details can be found in several publications. The original five walls,
Comp40 to Comp44 are presented in [1, 11, and 23]. These helped establish
the light damage loading protocol and verified the potential of DIC
measurements. The next two walls focused on the effect of pre-damage;
Comp45 and Comp46. These were addressed in [12, 24]. Next were Comp47
and Comp48 which introduced a double-clamped boundary and shear
behaviour; they are analysed in [4, 24]. Comp49 and Comp50 explored the
light-damage behaviour or calcium-silicate brick masonry for the first time and
are discussed in [3, 13, 24].
The subsequent walls were tested as complementary campaign to further
understanding into the light damage behaviour of calcium-silicate brick
masonry [30]. Additionally, new experiments with a double-clamped boundary

Experiments about Cracks

69

In addition to the full-scale walls, spandrels or window-banks were also tested.
A large set of twenty three fired-clay brick spandrels and five calcium-silicate
specimens were tested, each set of nominally-identical geometry; see Figure
3.1.10. An overview of these is presented in Table 3.2. The tests were
controlled using the crack-mouth-opening-displacement and included
monotonic and repetitive loading protocols. Table 3.2 already gathers results
from these tests. The maximum capacity is listed, with an average of 20 kN for
the fired-clay tests and 31 kN for the calcium-silicate tests. Moreover, the
reduction in force (or degradation) observed in each step is averaged over the
various loading steps. This means, for instance, that for a loading protocol of
3x10, three values are averaged: one corresponding to the maximum reduction
of the first step (between the very first and the tenth cycle), and two for the
second and third steps respectively. These results are further discussed in the
next section.
A: Clay - Shear Wall

B: Clay - With Opening

C: Clay - With Opening & Pre-Damage

3.5br
(780mm)

25br (1510mm)

Pull (+)

45br (2690mm)

Push (-)

14br (3070mm)

E: Calcium-Silicate - With Opening

3.5br
(794mm)

F: Calcium-Silicate - Split Shear Wall

18br (1486mm)

33br (2696mm)

D: Calcium-Silicate - Shear Wall

14br (3126mm)

Figure 3.1.9. Scheme of various wall types tested during the light-damage campaign to
characterise crack propagation in solid fired-clay (CLBR) and calcium-silicate brick
(CSBR) masonry walls.

Chapter 3

for fired-clay brick walls with an opening were tested. These walls, Comp52 to
Comp54, are specifically discussed in [31].

70

Chapter 3

Table 3.1. Overview of full-scale walls tested and their corresponding (cyclic) protocols.
See Figure 3.1.9 for wall types. Boundaries are Cantilever or Fixed.

Wall Name

Wall
Lab
Type Boundary

Protocol

Year
Built

Repetitive

Cyclic

Near Collapse

Comp40

B

C

2017

5x3

7x50

81 mm

Comp41

B

C

2017

5x10

7x30

40 mm

Comp42

B

C

2017

6x20

7x30

40 mm

Comp43

B

C

2017

NA

7x50

40 mm

Comp44

B

C

2017

6x20

NA

NA

Comp45

C

C

2018

5x30

7x30

NA

Comp46

C

C

2018

5x30

7x30

81 mm

Comp47

A

F

2018

A 7x10

27 mm

Comp48

A

F

2018

A 7x10

NA

Comp49

E

C

2018

5x30

7x30

40 mm

Comp50

E

C

2018

5x30

7x30

40 mm

Comp51

E

C

2021

5x30

7x30

81 mm

Comp52

E

C

2021

5x30

7x30

81 mm

Comp53

E

F

2021

5x30

7x30

40 mm

Comp54

B

C

2021

5x30

5x30

NA

Comp55

B

F

2021

6x30

8x30

27 mm

Comp56

B

F

2021

5x30

7x30

27 mm

Comp57

D

F

2021

A 7x10

40 mm

Comp58

F

F

2021

A 7x10

67 mm

Comp59

F

F

2021

A 7x10

54 mm

Experiments about Cracks

71

Table 3.2. Overview of full-scale spandrels over the experimental campaigns of 2017
and 2018 including the force reduction observed during repetitive testing protocols.

Mat-50
FiredClay
Brick

Mat-51
CalciumSilicate
Brick

Year

1B
1D
1E
1F
1G
1H
1I
1J

2017

1T

2017

CMOD at
Protoco Maximum Max Force
l
Force kN
µm

Average Cyclic
Force
Reduction

Monotonic

17.0
20.0
18.0
25.0
19.0
30.0
15.0
17.0

130
380
390
510
340
590
430
310

NA

2x10

22.0

280

18%

860
580
470
430

20%
11%
16%
16%
12%

1K
1L
1N
1O
1U

2017

3x10

17.0
19.0
18.0
15.0
25.0

1P

2017

3x100

25.0

450

16%

1M
1S

2017

3x30

18.0
20.0

270
240

17%
21%

1C

2017

5x3

29.0

740

13%

2A
2C

2018

3x30

29.0
25.0

170
110

15%
17%

2D
2E
2G

2018

5x30

16.0
22.0
15.0

360
70

32%
27%
32%

2B
2F

2018

6x15

26.0
28.0

120
310

11%
10%

2I
2J

2018

8x15

25.0
20.0

420

19%
19%

3x30

31.0
29.0
35.0
34.0
31.0

190
130
150
100
90

14%
14%
13%
15%
13%

2a
2b
2c
2d
2e

2018

Chapter 3

Test Code Specimen
Code

Chapter 3
F1

Load ~ 803

Loa

CM

9 br (530)

7 br (564)

CMOD sensor

Support ~ 388
CW1

6 br (1310)
F1

F2

Supp
CW1

CW2
Load ~ 819

F2

10

CMOD sensor

7 br (564)

MOD sensor

pport ~ 388

6 br (1310)

F1

F2

10

Load ~ 803

72

Support ~ 398
CW2

CW1

6 br (1334)

100
CW2

Figure 3.1.10. Geometry of fired-clay, top, and calcium-silicate, brick masonry spandrels.
The exact dimension and positioning of the load actuators was measured for each
specimen.

6 br

Experiments about Cracks

73

3.2. Results from Experiments on Walls and Spandrels
This section presents an overview of relevant results from the aforementioned
wall and spandrel tests, monitored to observe crack propagation. Many of
these tests are discussed independently in their associated publications and
reports; however, this summary consolidates the results in a manner which
allows more direct comparisons, establishing trends and observing general
behaviour.

Several walls were tested first with the repetitive, one-way cyclic, loading
protocol. These results are presented in terms of force and in-plane lateral
displacement in Figure 1a, sorted by maximum force capacity. The
displacement is divided by the height of the walls and expressed as drift. The
curves reveal several aspects to the behaviour of the walls: most walls have a
similar initial stiffness though the calcium-silicate brick walls (CSBR) are stiffer.
Most fired-clay walls reach their maximum capacity but do not continue into
softening. In contrast, the CSBR walls are more likely to display a drop in
capacity at the applied drifts beyond the peak. The curves display, of course,
the repetitive cycles enforced during the test with increasing drift. A reduction
in force is associated with every repetition of identical drift. Similarly, the
hysteresis behaviour is not negligible; a partially elastic unloading means that
to return to zero displacement, the wall must be subjected to a negative force.
In general, the CSBR walls show a higher hysteresis.
While most of the walls with the fixed boundary were tested with the
asymmetric loading protocol, two walls were also tested repetitively, one of
each material. Due to the double-clamped boundary, these last have the
highest capacity in terms of force, yet the behaviour between CL and CS is
distinctly different. The fired-clay displays like hysteresis and secant unloading,
while the CS wall shows a larger release of energy. Over the steps, both walls
develop large increases in force in contrast to the cantilever walls.
The second part of the figure shows the two-way cyclic test that followed (1b).
The first six plots, corresponding to fired-clay walls tested under a cantilever
boundary, show little hysteretic energy. Especially in the positive drift direction,
the reduction in force and the hysteresis are limited. This is because the
repetitive tests, in positive drift, had already damaged this direction. In the
negative drift direction, the tests display similar behaviour as during the
repetitive tests. The following three walls however, of calcium-silicate brick,
show a large hysteresis corresponding to a lowering force capacity, with shear

Chapter 3

3.2.1. Summary of Results on Wall Tests

74

Chapter 3

behaviour and matching elastic unloading. These walls develop additional
damage at these values of drift.
The walls under double-clamped (or fixed) boundary conditions develop larger
lateral forces. The largest capacity corresponds to Comp57, the CSBR shear
wall, which develops a sliding shear failure mechanism clearly reflected in the
force-drift curve; failure was abrupt. The previous two walls, shear walls made
of fired-clay (47 & 48), show nearly identical behaviour, with energy release
occurring only in the positive drift direction (asymmetric).
The behaviour of the walls is further compared in Figure 2, where the
envelopes of the cyclic tests are drawn together. Indeed, the CSBR walls show
the largest hysteresis, followed by the CLBR shear walls. It is also interesting to
observe the behaviour of Comp58 and Comp59. These were shear walls with a
vertical dilation joint. Comp58, which had the vertical joint in the middle, shows
lower capacity and little energy release, with failure consisting only of rocking.
Comp59, which had the joint at one-third of the wall’s length, experienced
shear failure in the wider pier, resulting in a larger release of energy. This is
associated with progressively propagating cracks (see the next subsection).
A comparison of the near-collapse envelopes is included in Figure 2. For clarity,
not all walls are presented; instead, the figure includes walls of different types.
Other walls are excluded because their behaviour is markedly different—these
are walls that were repaired or strengthened after the light-damage (LD) tests
and were tested again, including both LD and NC protocols. These studies,
which are not discussed in this work, included bed-joint reinforcement with
steel rebar (Licciardello et al. 2021) and structural glass in window openings
(Gaggero et al. 2022).
The near-collapse tests involved much higher drift values, which led to a
reduction in the lateral force capacity of most walls and resulted in much larger
hysteresis envelopes. Failures included sliding, rocking, and crushing in the
case of walls with double-clamped boundaries.
Finally, the results are further compared in Figure 3, where the deformed
shapes of a few walls are shown for particular instances during the tests. These
plots illustrate the magnified horizontal and vertical displacements of each grid
point from the DIC survey. In the figure, these displacements are magnified 400
times. Additionally, the instances are linked to specific moments in the tests,
automatically selected at the maximum drift in both negative and positive
directions for the cyclic tests, and at the positive drift during the repetitive
tests. These instances are taken from the last cycles of each test. Similarly,

Experiments about Cracks

75

residual displacements at the end of the tests, when the applied drift was
returned to zero, are also plotted.

15

Force in kN

Force in kN

10
5
0

-5

Cyclic - LD

0

5
125

Cyclic - LD

Comp40
Comp41
Comp42
Comp43
Comp45
Comp46
Comp50
Comp52
Comp56
Comp49

100

Comp53
Comp55
Comp58
Comp59
Comp47
Comp48
Comp57

75
50
25
0

-5

-25

-10

-50

-15

-75

-20

-100

-25

-125

30

90

20

60

10

30

0

0

-10

Near Collapse (NC) Tests
LD Region
Comp41
Comp42
Comp46
Comp51
Comp52

-20

-30
-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0

0.01

Comp56
Comp50*
Comp53*
Comp58*
Comp59*

0.02

-30

Chapter 3

20

10-4

Drift in m/m

5

Force in kN

25

0

Force in kN *

10-4

Drift in m/m
-5

-60

-90
0.03

Drift in m/m

Figure 3.2.2. Envelope of the force-drift curves for the cyclic tests, top, and for the nearcollapse tests, bottom. Walls with * are read on the right axis.

Despite its black-and-white nature, Figure 3 is illustrative. For instance, it shows
how cracking leads to the decomposition of walls into rigid blocks in some
cases, like Comp45, while in others, like Comp55 (which was tested with
double-clamped boundaries), the piers are clearly deformed. The figure also
shows how some walls experience cumulative shear sliding along the cracks,
leaving the piers with residual lateral displacement, as in the case of Comp49.
In addition, the behaviour of the shear walls with dilation joints becomes clear:
at larger drifts, the piers come into contact with each other, and vertical sliding

76

Chapter 3

takes place. For Comp59, the residual zero position shows that sliding at the
bottom of the right pier led to an increase in the opening of the dilation joint.
Of course, since the displacements are magnified, what appear to be large
cracks are, in the worst cases, only about 2 mm wide. Nevertheless, the
locations and configurations of the cracks along their lengths are remarkably
clear. The deformed shapes can also be used for one-on-one calibration
strategies for computational models, where the displacement at each node is
compared against the grid points from DIC.

Figure 3.2.1a. Force-Drift curves for the repetitive parts of wall tests.

77

Chapter 3

Experiments about Cracks

Figure 3.2.1b. Force-Drift curves for the cyclic parts of wall tests; this includes the tests
with the asymmetric loading protocol.

78

Chapter 3
Cyclic Zero.

Cyclic Pos.

Rep. Zero

Rep. Pos.

Comp59

Comp58

Comp48

Comp41

Comp55

Comp53

Comp52

Comp49

Comp45

Cyclic Neg.

Figure 3.2.3. Magnified deformed shapes towards the end of the tests for several walls.

Experiments about Cracks

79

3.2.2. Summary of Results on Spandrel Tests

Since the location of this single crack was known, it was also possible to control
the test by monitoring this crack; see Figure 3.2.4. This is known as a crackmouth-opening-displacement (CMOD) controlled experiment. The CMOD was
slowly increased by controlling the force applied with the hydraulic actuators
(jacks). For the repetitive tests, it was also possible to unload the samples down
to a minimum load of 2 kN; the cracks would then partially close. This
behaviour is illustrated in Figure 5 for every specimen tested.

Figure 3.2.4. Spandrel specimen 2B, fired-clay with toothed crack revealed by DIC
output; and sample 2a, calcium-silicate brick masonry with brittle, brick-splitting vertical
crack.

Chapter 3

The window banks were designed to develop a single vertical crack due to
bending or vertical shear. This sort of crack are common due to in-plane
bending of façades because of shrinkage or settlement actions, see Chapter 4,
and appear above doors or underneath openings for windows - hence the
name of the test. Additionally, these cracks may occur due to Rayleigh waves
propagating through the soil due to earthquakes.

80

Chapter 3

Figure 3.2.5. Force versus crack-mouth-opening-displacement for all the spandrel tests,
both monotonic and repetitive. See Table 3.2 for an overview of the specimens.

Because a relatively large number of specimens could be tested, many
different trials were conducted in terms of loading. For example, specimen 2D
was tested with the established 3x30 repetitive protocol at 50 µm, 100 µm, and
150 µm crack opening, but two additional steps were added at 500 µm and
1000 µm. For specimen 2E, these additional steps resulted in early failure,
before the monotonic phase. At 1 mm, the force degradation occurring during
the repetitions was significant; up to 40% in comparison to the 10% observed
during wall testing. Some specimens, like 2B, failed during the initial set of
repetitions, too, while others, like 2J could sustain the planned 6x15 repetitions

Experiments about Cracks

81

The large reduction in force during the repetitive steps in comparison to the
degradation observed at the walls was likely due to several reasons: First,
unlike the walls, the spandrels develop a single prominent crack. Through the
repetitions this toothed crack propagates but also slides over its zigzag
pattern. A part of this sliding remains during elastic unloading and so every
repetition requires a lower force to achieve the same overall displacement. This
central crack is a Mode I crack for tension in the vertical direction; however, at
the local scale, Mode II behaviour is observed at the bed-joints. For the walls,
the cracks have comparatively only Mode I behaviour. Nonetheless, calciumsilicate samples did not develop the zigzag crack. Therefore, their fracture
energy for tension in the horizontal direction appears drastically lower in
comparison to the clay specimens [3]. Crack behaviour is further discussed in
follow-up Section 3.2.3.
Secondly, the spandrels were CMOD controlled which also contributed to the
large force degradation. In contrast, the walls are drift controlled; the
repetitions imposed an identical drift and saw a force reduction and crack
propagation in terms of length and width. The spandrels, in turn, enforced a
constant crack width and so it follows that a larger force reduction or
degradation should be observed.
Finally, the repetitions for the spandrels occur at a proportionally higher
percentage of their ultimate displacement capacity. The repetitions were
conducted at an applied displacement 1/100 to 1/10 of the displacement
where the specimens failed. The walls, instead, were subjected to drift values
from 0.2 ‰ to 0.7 ‰ during repetitions and the near-collapse tests were halted
at drifts between 1 % to 3%. This means that the walls were tested at 1/150 to
1/50 of their ultimate drift. However, the walls were never allowed to fully fail
due to safety reasons so their ultimate drift might have been much larger; the
setup of the window banks, instead, could contain the samples even during
total failure, see Figure 4.
The force applied during the spandrel tests can also be plotted against the
displacement at the point of application of the force. This is presented in figure
3.13 for the monotonic tests and the envelope of repetitive tests. The graph is
drawn with the displacement on a logarithmic scale to better illustrate the
behaviour of the experiment where the initial branch appears stiff otherwise
(see Figure 3.11). On this logarithmic scale, the initially linear branch appears
as a rising curvature which changes to a downwards curvature as it approaches
the peak of maximum force. The inflection point corresponds thus to the start

Chapter 3

and two additional sets of 15 at the higher CMOD; failure occurred later during
the final monotonic stage.

82

Chapter 3

of non-linear behaviour. This means that cracks have begun much earlier than
the maximum capacity. In fact, the inflection point occurs at about one third of
the maximum force reached. This is also the relationship between the flexural
strength of the masonry (in-plane, head-joint opening) and its tensile strength.
The location of this inflection point relates to a measured CMOD of 45 µm, 52
µm, and 42 µm for the monotonic, repetitive, and calcium-silicate brick tests
respectively. It seems that at this crack width, cracking displays an effect on the
non-linear behaviour of the masonry.
The figure also shows that calcium-silicate tests are stiffer and stronger than
their clay counterparts. However, they are also significantly less ductile. Indeed,
all calcium-silicate spandrels failed in a brittle manner with a vertical crack
splitting bricks. The toothed crack developed by the fired-clay specimens did
not appear.
The reasons for the differing failure mechanisms are multiple. First the
geometry of the samples varies. Because of the larger calcium-silicate bricks
employed (70 vs 50 mm tall) the CSBR sample is slightly taller (17%). This was
compensated by separating the support points slightly, however, it still results
in internal forces where the CSBR samples experience comparatively more
shear while the CLBR ones have more bending.
Second and probably most influential, the relative strength between brick,
mortar, and brick-mortar interface result in a more detrimental combination for
the CSBR material. The clay bricks are stronger in tension and the initial shear
strength (cohesion) of the interface is lower. This means that the CS bricks are
subjected to more horizontal tension, for which they are ill prepared.
The bottom graph of Figure 3.2.6 demonstrates that the behaviour of the
monotonic tests well represented by the envelope of the repetitive tests. This
means that the envelope of cyclic tests can be used to validate also models
with monotonic loading.

Experiments about Cracks

Force in kN

30

83

All Spandrel Tests
Monotonic
Repetitive
Fired-Clay
Calcium-Silicate

20
10
0

10-4

10-3

10-2

10-1

100

10-1

100

Vertical Jack Displacement in mm
Averages
Clay Monotonic
Clay Repetitive
CaSi Repetitive
Average

20

Chapter 3

Force in kN

30

10
0

10-4

10-3

10-2

Vertical Jack Displacement in mm
Figure 3.2.6. Force-displacement summary of the spandrel tests using the upper
envelopes of the curves. The horizontal scale is logarithmic.

84

Chapter 3

3.2.3. Lessons about Crack Propagation
Many results from the spandrel and wall experiments have been shown in
previous sections; glimpses of the influence of cracking have been provided.
In this section, a clearer focus is placed on results about crack propagation.
Every crack from every experiment cannot be investigated. Instead, a few
examples are presented with different types of figures to illustrate and later
conclude some lessons about crack initiation and propagation in masonry. The
earlier publications and the dataset published along this dissertation (see
Appendix F) supply additional details.
First, consider the increase in crack width over repeated cycles. Figure 7 shows
the measurement of a CMOD that happened to be located in the correct
location to capture the crack forming at the bottom right corner of the first wall
tested, Comp40. The value output by this sensor was used to determine the
magnitude of the first drift enforced - that which corresponded to an observed
crack width of 0.1 mm. During this first step, of three repetitions each, the
identical drift didn’t lead to any measurable crack increase; however, while the
drift was increased by 25% for the second step, the CMOD increased 100% to
0.2mm. Moreover, already during the second step, a slight increase in crack
width within the step could be seen. Later steps also saw an increase in crack
width measured at the mouth over the repetitions.
0.7
Comp 40

LVDT - CMOD in mm

0.6

Crack 2

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Cycles

Figure 3.2.7. Crack width of the very first test with three repetitions (TUD-Comp 40). A
slight increase can be observed within each incremental step (five of three repetitions
each). Measured with an LVDT at the crack mouth of Crack 2 as identified with DIC. The
overview, right, is drawn from end of third step.

Figure 8 shows the progression of four cracks, at different locations and in
different walls. The progress is shown in terms of crack width, length, and
pattern. First, the body shear crack of Comp47 begins at the top. With a small
crack width, the length of the crack first increases. Then, both width and length

Experiments about Cracks

85

The second case of Comp53 also sees a more important crack propagation
towards the end of the test. In this case, the length remains mostly constant
after the third image since the crack cannot continue extending. Instead, the
last steps see a significant increase in width. This is alike the example of
Comp49. In this case, the highlighted crack had appeared during the repetitive
part of the test, and the figure shows the cyclic portion. Consequently, once
the crack opens, the entire length is activated, connecting the corner of the
window opening and the edge of the wall on the left side of the pier. Also, the
opening of the crack follows the steps in applied drift, though with a small
slope of increasing width. Only at the end of the test, when higher values of
drift are applied, the crack width displays a steadier increase.
Recalling Figure 3.1.7, where for Comp55 the same crack as Comp45 is
highlighted, reveals a comparable behaviour. The nominally identical walls, of
the same material and testing protocol only differ in the year of construction
and the fact that Comp45 had been pre-damaged with “unbonded” joints.
This pre-damage however seems not to have influenced the crack at the top
right of the window opening. This is reasonable since the pre-damage was
located such that the positive drift direction was affected (see Figure 3.1.8) and
the highlighted cracks appear during negative drift. In both cases, the cracks
first grow more rapidly in length, while the width develops mostly at the end of
the test.
This behaviour can be further studied with a different type of graph for yet
additional cracks not yet highlighted. Indeed, the following figures show the
“trail plots” of selected cracks. These display the width of the crack along their
entire length. The length is followed along the centre line of the crack. In this
way, it is possible to see if cracks are tapered, where one end is wider than the
other, or, as opposite, if they display a uniform width. The trail plots show crack
progression but plotting all instances of the width-length relationship for the
given crack. This means that the state of the crack at the beginning of the test
(blue) fades over (green, yellow) to the state at the end of the test (red).
Note that the crack width is the principal component of both opening and
sliding. Also, the length is the true length following the stair-case path of the
crack. For a complex crack (such as later shown for Comp48), the length will be
the stair-case length between the most extreme end points of the crack.

Chapter 3

develop quickly towards the end of the test. This is contrary to the behaviour
observed for the example of Comp45. Here, the width and length of the crack,
after it has appeared in the very first cycles, gradually progresses over the
entire experiment, with an aggravation that follows the applied drift.

86

Chapter 3

The first part of Figure 3.2.9 shows a simple crack forming at the bottom right
corner of Comp54. The crack first propagates horizontally and then continuesstaircase diagonally. The horizontal portion, both at the beginning as towards
the end of the test shows a reasonably constant width with a peak at the very
mouth of the crack. The propagating crack through the head joints of the
masonry quickly becomes less wide. Throughout this test, the width of the
crack increased about 4-fold but its length grew almost 7-fold. The test
included five steps of thirty repetitions (5x30). The first and second steps didn’t
see much crack development. However, between the second and third, and
subsequent steps, a clear increase in width and length appeared. Within each
step, these increases were minor; yet, especially during the last step, the larger
width and length correspond to the last repetitions.
Cycle 150

Cycle 168

Cycle 183

Cycle 200

0.6

4000
Comp47

0.4

3000

Highlighted Cycles
Width
Length

2000

0.2

1000

0
60

90

120

150

0
210

180

Crack Length in mm

Crack Width in mm

Cycle 120

Cycles
Cycle 65

Cycle 182

Cycle 219

Cycle 237

0.8

600

0.6

400

0.4

Comp53

0.2

Highlighted Cycles
Width
Length

0
30

60

90

120

150

180

210

240

200
0

Crack Length in mm

Crack Width in mm

Cycle 57

Cycles

Figure 3.2.8. Progression of selected cracks on selected walls at selected intervals.
Crack tracking monitors the progression in terms of crack width as well as crack length is
layout; specific instances are highlighted. The cases of Comp47 and Comp53 are
shown. See also Figure 3.1.7 for Comp55.

Experiments about Cracks
Cycle 100

Cycle 131

Cycle 167

Cycle 198

1

1500
Comp45
Highlighted Cycles
Width
Length

0.5

1000
500

0
0

30

60

90

120

150

0
210

180

Crack Length in mm

Crack Width in mm

Cycle 72

87

Cycles
Cycle 145

Cycle 174

Cycle 199

1200

3

1000

2
1
0
30

60

90

120

150

180

Comp49

800

Highlighted Cycles
Width
Length

600
400
240

210

Chapter 3

Cycle 112

Crack Length in mm

Crack Width in mm

Cycle 78

Cycles

Figure 3.2.8 (continued). Crack tracking for walls Comp45 and Comp49.
0.4

Comp 54

Crack 2

Crack Width in mm

Window Right Bottom Corner
0.3

0.2

0.1

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

Crack Length (Path) in mm
Figure 3.2.9a. Crack width-length plot (Trail plot) for crack 1 at the right bottom corner
of the window opening for Comp54, fired-clay wall, repetitive, cantilever test.

88

Chapter 3

0.6

Crack - Rocking Top Right
Comp 48

Crack 1

Crack Width in mm

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

Crack Length (Path) in mm

Crack - Body Shear

Crack 4

Comp 48

Crack Width in mm

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

Crack Length (Path) in mm
Figure 3.2.9b. Trail plots for cracks 1 and 4, the top rocking crack and the lower body
crack for the test of the fired-clay shear wall, Comp48.

Similarly, Figure 9b shows the trail plots for the shear wall, Comp48. In this
case, two cracks are selected. The rocking crack at the top forms at the very
beginning of the test and displays a clean progression of width and length. The
crack is tapered, the larger width is shown always on the left of the plot but
corresponds to the right tip of the crack at the crack mouth on the edge of the
wall. Around the middle of the test, the crack length stopped increasing
substantially and the crack aggravation focused on a progressive increase in
width until about 0.55 mm. The body crack behaves differently. The crack width
is maximum at the centre of the crack. This is expected for a shear crack; see
also the deformed shapes in Figure 3.1.7. The crack also increases in length.

Experiments about Cracks

89

1.4
1.3 Crack 1
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

Crack Right
Bottom
Corner
Comp 50

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Crack Width in mm

Crack Length (Path) in mm
2.4 Crack 4
2.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

Crack Right
Top Corner
Comp 50

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Crack Length (Path) in mm
Figure 3.2.9c. Trail plots for cracks 1 and 4, the bottom and top cracks propagating on
the right side of the window opening during the repetitive+cyclic tests of the calciumsilicate brick wall, Comp50.

The case of Comp50, one of the calcium-silicate walls where cracks
propagating off the four window corners reached the opposite ends of the
piers, is presented in Figure 9c. This figure comprises the repetitive and cyclic
tests together. Both cracks are quite uniform with a constant width that
increases rapidly at the end of the test. Crack 1, opens up for both values of

Chapter 3

Crack Width in mm

Most of the aggravation, however, occurs in the later cycles. The crack quickly
grows once the deformation localises, the head joints open, sections of the
crack cut vertically through bricks, and other nearby cracks unload.

90

Chapter 3

drift, positive and negative. For the main cracking direction, it is uniform, but
for the opposite it is tapered. The other crack, at the bottom corner is also
uniform but tapers quickly towards the tip. During rocking, the very tip must
remain in compression (toe) and thus the crack width quickly goes to zero.
These graphs show that there are different types of cracks, even in similar tests
and in the same specimen. However, the cracks behave consistently during
repeated and increasing loading: propagation occurs with increases in width
and length.
A similar analysis can be conducted for the spandrels. The centre portion of the
window banks was also surveyed with DIC. Figure 3.2.10 shows a few of the
crack patterns that arose during the tests. The cracks begin at the top, along
one of the three centre head joints, and descend zig-zagging along the joints.
Conceptually, this represents a vertical crack in masonry; (smeared) continuum
material models would identify them like vertical cracks. The first six specimens
selected correspond to the fired-clay material and represent all the variations
on crack pattern observed. The last example is one of the few calcium-silicate
specimens for which the DIC was able to capture the brick-splitting vertical
crack before the sample failed completely. This is probably because the crack
bifurcated at the bed joint instead of continuing straight vertically. The figure
also reveals that vertical cracks localise less than horizontal cracks. Several
neighbouring joints appear open along the main crack path.

2E

2F

2D

2C

2G

2d
Figure 3.2.10. Examples of crack patterns observed during the window bank tests.

2B

91

Figure 3.2.11. Crack trail plot for a window bank (2A).

At an increased resolution, it is also possible to present trail plots for the main
crack in the window bank tests; the case of specimen 2A is depicted in Figure
11. The crack is invisible during the repetitive portion of the test as the width is
much smaller than 0.1 mm, with a length of about 100 mm, corresponding to
opening of the head-joint and a part of the bed-joint. During the monotonic
part of the test, at much greater CMOD, the crack grows quickly in width and
proportionally in length. Around the corners between head- and bed-joints,
drastic decreases in width can be observed. The behaviour of this vertical crack
in the spandrels doesn’t differ much from that of the cracks observed in the
walls. This further validates the observation that crack propagation is consistent
among different types of cracks.

3.2.4. Conclusions about Crack Propagation
The experiments have demonstrated that cracks mostly initiate from the
corners of openings. In some cases also at the lateral edges of walls, and when
walls are loaded in shear, also body cracks may appear. For lateral loading,
most cracks are horizontal or step-wise diagonal. They begin smeared over
multiple joints but coalesce into a single crack. The other nearby cracks unload
and close [4].
When cracks propagate, both their width and length grow simultaneously. It is
rare for a crack to grow in length but not in width. The opposite is also true:
when cracks widen, their length also increases until that is no longer possible.

Chapter 3

Experiments about Cracks

92

Chapter 3

For example, when a crack spans an entire pier, its length cannot continue
increasing. In this case, the width of the crack increases at a higher rate.
The high-resolution monitoring system detected that cracks appear even
before they become visible to the naked eye. Many cracks remain ‘invisible’
while others propagate. Sometimes these invisible cracks never manifest as
other cracks become dominant. However, a variation in loading could have
aggravated these cracks.
Different types of cracks (horizontal, diagonal, vertical, tapered, or uniform) do
not behave too differently in terms of crack propagation. Indeed, similar
aggravation in terms of increases in width and length can be expected under
similar increases in loading.
Furthermore, repetition has an effect on crack propagation. Under identical
loading, cracks still become wider and longer. This effect is minor but
measurable and consistent. The effect of repetition is explored in more detail in
Sections 3.2 and 6.1.

3.2.5. Four Ways to Utilise the Experimental Results
The experimental tests serve several purposes. Many are specifically
exemplified in this report in various sections. First, experiments can be used
directly. The results are analysed and observations are drawn from them; this is
shown in earlier sections. Additionally, the experiments can be used to test new
technologies such as high-resolution DIC. Furthermore, the results can be
processed to establish relationships between measured values. For example, in
Section 3.3 next, a relation between drift and damage is established,
formulating drift limits.
Second, the experimental results can be used to tune or validate numerical
models. The input parameters for many material models must be derived
experimentally. A calibration of finite element method models is conducted in
Chapter 4.
Third, the experiment-calibrated models are used for extrapolations, analysing
actions that are difficult to evaluate in experiments. In this way, the experiments
are used indirectly. An example is elaborated in Chapter 5.
Finally, the experimental results can be compared to other phenomena. For
example, effects observed from monitoring real structures can be contrasted
against similar cases investigated experimentally. In Chapter 6, the effect of
repetition in various models is compared to the effects of repetition observed
in the experiments.

Experiments about Cracks

93

3.3. Crack-Based Drift Limits from Experimental Results
This section presents the first applied results from the experimental campaign
in the form of drift limits.

In the realm of structural engineering, the determination of drift limits stands as
a pivotal aspect in assessing the performance and resilience of buildings
subjected to lateral forces such as wind or those induced by vibrations (FEMA
2013, Crowley et al. 2017). Drift limits serve as invaluable thresholds,
facilitating a comprehensive understanding of a structure's behaviour under
dynamic loading conditions [3] and some quasi-static actions like differential
settlements (Burland et al. 1974). Engineers, during the design or retrofitting
phases, routinely employ drift limits as metrics to gauge and ensure the
structural integrity of a building, with the aim of meeting specified performance
goals when exposed to various hazards (Del Gaudio et al. 2017).
Masonry walls are particularly susceptible to damage resulting from in-plane
actions. Thus, it is imperative to verify that in-plane drift remains within
acceptable limits to mitigate the risk of (structural) damage (Aldemir et al.
2015). Within performance-based design, frequent vibrations or wind loads
should be considered such that masonry components do not enter light
damage. Drift limits provide a useful tool for this analysis (Colangelo, 2015).
The current landscape of drift limits for masonry walls often encounters
limitations, especially when not derived from crack-based damage
assessments. Notably, existing limits, especially those used for DS1, are
frequently extrapolated from higher damage grades predicated on the
structure’s ultimate capacity or ductility (Crowley et al. 2019, Gehl et al. 2013).
This extrapolation poses challenges in accurately predicting the threshold at
which damage becomes a concern, highlighting the need for more specific and
experimentally-derived drift limits. These offer a more granular and realistic
understanding of a masonry wall's response to lateral forces. Unlike modelbased or extrapolation-based limits, experimentally-derived thresholds for light
damage provide a direct and precise measure of the drift at which damage
initiates (Magenes et al. 1997, 2010; Giardina et al. 2016). A clear definition of
damage must be applied, however; see Chapter 2.
Indeed, most experiments of in-plane walls have focused on establishing
thresholds at which the strength capacity of the components is compromised:
this is the ultimate limit state or near-collapse. Limits, at which damage begins,
where mechanical damage is related to crack-based damage in masonry, have

Chapter 3

3.3.1. Drift Limits for Light Damage Lacking in Literature

94

Chapter 3

seldom been directly quantified. They rather have been indirectly extrapolated
from the shape of force-displacement curves (Negulescu et al. 2014, Petry &
Beyer, 2015). Crack-based light damage, ranging from just-visible cracks to
wider cracks not yet compromising the capacity of a wall or component, is
nevertheless important to quantify repair and maintenance costs, to prevent
additional damage (such as the ingress of water into the structure).
The walls presented in the previous section can be used to define experimental
drift limits suitable for light damage. The outcome of these tests is analysed in
this section in terms of the relationship between drift and damage with the
goal of determining when light damage begins and when it can be considered
to end. The section starts with a brief overview of the relevant aspects of the
tests and continues with an investigation of drift and crack-based damage as
measured with the Ψ parameter. A discussion, including a comparison to other
drift limits and a wrap-up conclusion, are included in the last subsection.
This scheme is shown in Figure 1 where the methodology of the section is
described in a flow chart. The experimental tests and the definition of light
damage from earlier work are brought up to post-process digital-imagecorrelation measurements from the tests to determine cracking behaviour. This
becomes the response variable in a machine learning classification problem
that includes other features from the test such as the wall geometries and
setup boundaries, though ultimately isolating drift as the main predictor for
damage. Moreover, drift thresholds are defined for two types of masonry,
namely fired-clay and calcium-silicate brick masonry.
Chapters 2 and 3.1

Experimental Tests
for Light Damage

Consolidation and
Summary:
Data of tests on
Masonry Walls

Postprocessing:
Crack-based damage (DIC),
Test Progress Indicator,
Drift Values, etc.

Machine Learning

Definition of Light
Damage Scale

Threshold of Damage
Levels (DS1, DS2)

Analysis of Importance of
Variables between Tests

Classification Tree to
define Drift Limits

Goal
Drift Limits for Light-Damage
of Two Masonry Types

Figure 3.3.1. Flowchart of the process to obtain drift limits from the experiments.

Experiments about Cracks

95

To characterise the cracking behaviour of masonry at the component scale, that
is, to observe how cracks initiate and propagate on full-size elements such as
walls, several types of experiments have been conducted. In parallel, tests
focused on the fracture mechanics of masonry, at the brick-to-brick scale in
tension and shear were analysed, while smaller wallets were included to
investigate compressive properties and predominantly vertical cracking in inplane flexure. The focus, however, was placed on walls about 3.1 meters wide
and 2.7 meters tall built of single wythe (about 100 mm) brick masonry in a
stretcher bond pattern. Twenty walls have been tested with a light damage
protocol and sixteen of them were driven to near-collapse; see Section 3.1.
Various experiments focused on different brick materials, initial conditions such
as existing cracks represented by “unbonded” joints, varying cycle repetitions,
openings, differing boundary conditions, etc. A common thread throughout
these, however, was the light damage protocol consisting of a large number of
repeated, incremental cycles (Section 3.1.1) surveyed by digital image
correlation (Section 3.1.2). In this context, it is possible to link the applied inplane drift to the cracked conditions of the masonry.
The walls were loaded first, with a one-way, cyclic in-plane drift is enforced with
five or six steps of repeated cycles. The amplitude of the first step is that which
causes a value of Ψ=1; this is repeated 3, 10, 20 or 30 times before increasing
this amplitude by 25% for the following step. The magnitude of the increase is
kept constant. Second, a two-way cyclic (with both positive and negative) drift
is applied. The magnitude of the steps is the same as for the one-way cycles
with up to seven steps, meaning that the amplitude of the last step is 2.75
times larger than the first step. Each step consists of 30 or 50 cycles. Third, a
near-collapse protocol is applied which comprises fixed displacements: though
the tests might be terminated before the last step. Alternatively to the
repetitive and cyclic protocols, an asymmetric light-damage protocol may be
employed. This one includes cycles in both directions, but the amplitude of the
cycles in one direction is halved.
The different stages of the tests have been analysed previously: The repetitive
stage only includes drift values in one direction and is associated with a
reduction or degradation of the force of each repetition of the drift; the force
remains mostly positive. Some residual drift is accumulated towards the end of
his stage. The cyclic phase includes drifts in the opposite direction. Most of the
force degradation in the positive direction has already occurred while the
negative drift still leads to a reduction of the force within every step. This force
degradation is linked to a propagation of the cracks in both width and length.

Chapter 3

3.3.2. Repetition in the Loading Protocol of Experiments

96

Chapter 3

Finally, the near collapse stage offers a more familiar picture with large
reductions in lateral capacity at increased drift and a considerable hysteresis
envelope during shear failure. See Figure 3.2.1 earlier.
The repetitive, cyclic, and asymmetric protocols enforce in-plane drift values
that reach up to the maximum force capacity of the specimens. Up until this
point, cracking develops and later worsens during the near-collapse stage until
the final failure mechanism. Throughout the experiments, DIC is used to
measure a displacement field of the entire surface of the walls. This means that
cracks anywhere on the walls can be tracked accurately. For every value of drift
and at the intermediate zero drift value, a record of the cracks was captured
and the value of Ψ automatically computed based on the width, length and
number of cracks.

3.3.3. Relationship between Crack-based Damage and in-plane Drift
The intensity of damage is characterised by the cracks on the walls using Ψ.
These are plotted in Figure 3.3.2 against the absolute value of drift. However,
the figure includes two horizontal and four vertical thresholds which are
dissected in this subsection. The former correspond to the values of Ψ that
establish the transition into and out of light damage. The latter are the drift
values that are the goal of this section. Note that drift is plotted on a
logarithmic scale which suggests an exponential relationship to damage. This
relationship is dependent on the formulation of Ψ where the number of cracks
and the weighted crack width carry exponents of 0.15 and 0.3, respectively.
Experimental:

12

vs. Drift

CLBR
CSBR

- Damage Indicator

10

8

6

Incipient Light Damage
Light Damage
Non-Light Damage
Drift Threshold CSBR
Drift Threshold CLBR

4

=4.0

2

=1.9

0
10-5

10-4

10-3

10-2

10-1

Drift (in m/m)

Figure 3.3.2. Wall in-plane drift against crack-based damage measured by Ψ. Proposed
thresholds for clay and calcium-silicate brick masonry are included; see next section.

Experiments about Cracks

97

The lowest values of Ψ that can be accurately measured by the DIC system are
around 1 with at least one crack with a maximum width of 0.1mm and a
minimum length of 100 mm, or two cracks of slightly narrower width (70µm).
Since the narrower end of a crack must also be reliability detected, in practice,
the lowest values of Ψ measured are slightly above 1. This means that the
threshold for the beginning of light damage must be set a bit higher. This value
and the one for the end of light damage are determined by ‘kmeans’ clustering
to help establish optimum categories (Likas et al. 2003). Additionally, these are
verified iteratively by maximising the true positive rate and minimising the false
positive rate of a classification model (Narassiguin et al. 2016) while
maintaining some realistic values.
The upper threshold of Ψ=4, which corresponds to two or three cracks of 5 to
6 mm in width, follows from clustering the data in Figure 3.3.2 also using
kmeans clustering. The lower threshold of Ψ=1.9, which is linked to about
three cracks of 0.5 mm width, is the result of a second clustering step and
iterations with the classification model (Oses et al. 2014).
First, this classification model must be introduced. A classification model
predicts a category given a set of inputs (Sharafati et al. 2021, Son et al. 2014).
The relationship between the inputs and the predictions is set via a training
process. For an unrelated example: whether a brick is of fired-clay or calciumsilicate, could be determined based on the color in a photograph. When the
photograph is more red, the brick is likely of clay, while a more even
distribution between colors (red, green, and blue) would suggest a brick of
calcium-silicate. A simple model could employ a linear relationship and
determine the ratios of RGB, trained on pre-classified (tagged) photographs, to
later make predictions between the two brick categories.
There are many types of classification models with different types of trainable
parameters. For a classification problem with a small number of discrete
categories and a few predictors, a classification tree will produce good results.
Second, relevant predictors should be defined. From Figure 3.3.2, it should be
clear that drift can be used to predict damage, with larger values of damage
associated with larger values of drift in a positive correlation. Additionally,
Figure 3.3.3 compares the relationship between wall type and damage; see the
wall types in Figure 3.1.8.
The ratio of Ψ divided by drift shows that walls of the D type exhibited larger
values of Ψ at lower drift when compared to the other wall types. Since D is a
CaSi shear wall without openings, it is reasonable that A, the fired-clay shear

Chapter 3

Setting Ψ Thresholds for Light damage based on Experiments

98

Chapter 3

walls, display the second highest ratio. The material of the masonry is included
in the wall type.

Normalised Ratio /Drift
Trimmed to middle quantile of 0.985

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
A

B

C

D

E

F

Wall Type
Figure 3.3.3. Influence of wall type, see Table 3.1.9. If Ψ and Drift are linearly correlated,
wall type D exhibits, on average, greater damage at equal drift compared to other wall
types.

Two additional predictors are available: the boundary during the test that
enforces a double-clamped or allows a cantilever condition, and the progress
of the test. Since crack damage is accumulated throughout the test, towards
the end, even at values of zero drift, residual cracks will be clearly visible. This
means that identical values of drift will yield a higher Ψ value if they occur later
in the test. To investigate the influence of test progression, an indicator, linearly
correlated between the first and last measurement instances, is introduced as
additional feature. Furthermore, the data was pre-processed by taking the
absolute values of drift and removing measurements with Ψ=0, ultimately
employing about six thousand data points.
Classification Decision Tree
A decision tree creates nodes between branches to make decisions. For
example, if the masonry is fired-clay, the tree would follow the left branch.
Ultimately, every leaf at the end of each branch corresponds to a category. The
number of times a certain predictor is used at the nodes to make a decision
(and the number of leaves affected), corresponds to its importance. The
aforementioned predictors are gathered in Table 3.3.1 where their importance
is shown. Two variations are presented, one including the wall type as a
predictor and another where only the masonry type is considered; these are

Experiments about Cracks

99

mutually exclusive. The wall type, which contains more variability than the
masonry type, is also a better predictor for damage, Ψ. The progression of the
test is also associated with a relatively high importance of 10%. This means that
damage does increase at repeated drift. However, larger values of drift are also
imposed towards the end of the tests (as near collapse testing must follow the
light damage protocol) so the relationship might be doubly correlated. Finally,
the boundary of the test has the lowest importance. Whether the test was in
cantilever or double-clamped form seems to be poorly related to the intensity
of the cracks.

Predictor
Drift

Importance

Description

77.2% 79.5% The in-plane wall drift measured during the tests.

Test
Progress

10.6% 11.9%

An indicator, linearly correlated between the first and last
measurement instance.

Wall Type

8.7%

NA

The geometry or type of wall, as per Table 1.

Boundary

3.5%

3.4%

The test boundary, Cantilever or Fixed (double-clamped).

Masonry

NA

5.2%

The type of masonry, CLBR or CSBR, included in Wall
Type.

The performance of the classification model with the wall types can be
evaluated using Receiver Operator Curves (ROC) and confusion charts. These
are displayed in Figure 3.3.4. An ROC plots the relationship between the true
positive and false positive rate. Ideally, a model should never miss a true result,
but this may come at the expense of outputting false positives. This balance
can be tuned depending on the application and the desired type of outcome.
For example, for this application, it is important that the model never misses a
result that exceeds light damage (ELD). This is successfully achieved as
evidenced by the 37 cases of ELD that are correctly identified by the model.
However, the model also estimates 13 other cases (that were actually LD) as
ELD; these are the false positives within the category of ELD. Between incipient
LD and actual LD the model is also capable of accurately recalling the true data
values with more than 93% accuracy. This is verified by the high AUC (area
under curve) values in the ROC plots. The threshold of Ψ=1.9 for the beginning
of LD, is determined by iteratively adjusting this value and observing the best
accuracy and AUC rates.

Chapter 3

Table 3.3.1. Description of various potential predictors for Ψ and their importance within
a decision tree regression model. Wall type and masonry are mutually exclusive.

100

Chapter 3
Emsemble Tree Model
Incipient LD

3359

158

0.8

Light Damage (LD)

141

2289

True Class

True Positive Rate

ROC Curve
1

0.6
0.4

Exceeding LD

Precision:
Incorrectly predicted

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

False Positive Rate

13

93.7%

6.3%

37

100.0%

93.5%

74.0%

4.0%

6.5%

26.0%

LD

)
(LD

t
ien

ip
Inc

4.5%

96.0%

0.2
Incipient LD (AUC = 0.9908)
Light Damage (LD) (AUC = 0.9892)
Exceeding LD (AUC = 1)

95.5%

ht

Lig

ge

D

a
am

ing

TPR:
Correcly recalled

LD

ed
xce

E

Predicted Class

Figure 3.3.4. Confusion chart and ROC curve for an ensemble decision tree model with
drift, wall type, boundary, and test progress as predictors of the damage class.

Simplified Models for Drift-Ψ
While the model with four predictors (drift, test progress, wall type, and
boundary) is very accurate, it requires several assumptions to be used in
practice. For example, the type of wall will depend on the geometry and
material of the wall being considered, the boundary will depend on its
structural context, and the test progress will have to be linked, perhaps, to the
age of the wall. The drift would be the design criterium to limit expected
damage. Some of these assumptions can be difficult to define.
For this reason, a simpler model, considering only drift and masonry material as
predictors, has been analysed. This can be more easily employed in practice
and can be reduced to drift limits which do not require the trained model for
making predictions. The performance of the model is segregated by masonry
type, fired-clay (CLBR) or calcium-silicate (CSBR) brick masonry in Figure 3.3.5.
It Is clear that the simpler model is less accurate than the full model; however,
the high specificity for ELD is maintained with only 1 false positive for each
model. Similarly, both ILD and LD are well discerned though some crosspredictions appear. In general, the models misclassify LD less often, which is
desirable.
The results can be employed to derive the drift interval for which the models
will classify a wall into light damage. These values are presented in Table 3.3.2.
The beginning of LD is fairly consistent between both types of material at
about 0.05%, which is an incredibly small value of drift, about 1.35mm for a
wall of 2.7m in height. The masonry will remain within LD for a reasonably long
interval until a drift of 0.48% for CLBR but only 0.29% for CSBR. Nevertheless,
these values fall underneath drift limits employed to assess the ultimate
capacity of masonry walls; see next subsection.

Experiments about Cracks

101
CLBR
Incipient LD

2056

364

0.8

Light Damage (LD)

436

1154

1

72.5% 27.5%

1

18

94.7%

82.5%

76.0%

94.7%

17.5%

24.0%

5.3%

0.6
0.4

Exceeding LD

Precision:
Incorrectly predicted

0.2
Incipient LD (AUC = 0.8078)
Light Damage (LD) (AUC = 0.8061)
Exceeding LD (AUC = 0.9542)

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

ht

Lig

1

)

D

ge

ma
Da

(LD

din

e
xce

ROC Curve for CSBR

CSBR
Incipient LD

972

125

0.8

Light Damage (LD)

179

672

0.4

Exceeding LD

Precision:
Incorrectly predicted

0.2
Incipient LD (AUC = 0.8802)
Light Damage (LD) (AUC = 0.8785)
Exceeding LD (AUC = 0.9997)

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

11.4%

1

78.9%

21.1%

18

100.0%

84.3%

94.7%

15.6%

15.7%

5.3%

LD

D)

t

ht

Lig

1

88.6%

84.4%

ien

ip
Inc

TPR:
Correcly recalled

D

Predicted Class

0.6

5.3%

E

1

0

gL

False Positive Rate

True Class

True Positive Rate

0

tL

ien

ip
Inc

85.0% 15.0%

ge

ma
Da

(L

ng

edi
xce

TPR:
Correcly recalled

LD

E

Predicted Class

False Positive Rate

Figure 3.3.5. Confusion chart and ROC curve for clay brick masonry (top) and calciumsilicate brick masonry (bottom) using only Drift and Masonry as predictors of damage
class.
Table 3.3.2. Summary drift limits for each masonry type in mm/m or ‰.
Threshold

Fired-Clay Brick Masonry

Calcium-Silicate Brick Masonry

Start of Light Damage

0.58 ‰

0.50 ‰

End of Light Damage

4.78 ‰

2.90 ‰

Chapter 3

True Class

True Positive Rate

ROC Curve for CLBR
1

102

Chapter 3

3.3.4. Discussion and Comparison to Other Drift Limits
Guidelines, codes and the work of many authors have focused on establishing
drift limits related to the ultimate capacity of masonry components; see, for
example the Swiss, New-Zealand or Italian codes.
Some authors have derived limits associated with the lower damage states as
extrapolations from ultimate drift values (Salmanpour et al. 2015). Figure 3.3.6
provides an overview of comparisons against limits defined for ULS, for
“significant damage”, and for DS2. Since different approaches consider
different parameters, such as the overburden, the compressive strength of the
masonry, the height of the walls or only the rotating height of a pier, the
expected failure mechanism, etc., for the various walls tested, a range of limits
are often obtained depending on the multiple assumptions; these are plotted
in a box graph where the middle horizontal lines depict the mean values and
the boxes indicate the interquartile range. For this comparison, the individual
walls are not observed, but the thresholds defined with the classification tree
are used.
The first premise is that ULS limits should be higher than those for lower
damage states. Indeed, all formulations result in values larger than the value
determined for the upper threshold of light damage. The Italian guideline (MIT,
NTC 2008) for example, prescribes values for ultimate drift between 0.6% for
shear walls and 1.8% for rocking masonry piers. Both values are significantly
higher than that determined herein for the end of light damage at 0.5%.
Employing the formulation from the ASCE (ASCE, SEI 41-13, 2014), results in
even larger expected ultimate drift values of 2.5%.
The second premise is that limits for significant damage (SD) should be right at
the end of the light damage range. Petry & Beyer (2015) propose limits both
for ULS and SD, the latter directly preceding the former and slightly above the
values defined by the classification model. The New Zealand code (NZSEE
2017) also prescribes values for SD which should correspond to the end of light
damage. This seems to agree well with the values derived from the
experiments. Similarly, FEMA (Hazus MH MR5 2013) also specifies drift values
to be used for the analysis of pre-code unreinforced masonry structures; this
describes the type of masonry components tested and also matches well with
the drift values obtained.
With a limited data set part of earlier work [1], it was deduced that DS1 would
occur for drift values between 0.3 and 1.1 ‰ for fired-clay brick walls in
cantilever tests. Note that the damage state is a range of drift values and not a
single threshold. As such, the starting threshold is slightly lower than observed

Experiments about Cracks

103

herein with the extended data and a more rigorous analysis - though the
threshold for Ψ was set more strictly, considering just visible damage. The
upper threshold, however, is significantly lower. This is because the earlier work
investigated only DS1 and forwent DS2 even though the distinctions between
the two are seldom strictly defined. In this section, the first two states are
clustered into the light damage category, distinguishing between light damage
and exceeding it.

2.5

Significant Damage

Drift Limit in % [cm/m]

2

Exceeding Light Damage
(Moderate or DS2+)
1.5

1

0.5

)
)
l.
M
t3
ree
yer
EE
CE
TC
our
SIA (ULS
one
et a
UR
Be
Par
ZS
nT
anp
nN
iss
(St
hl
e
r
N
8
o
a
&
e
d
i
i
e
m
w
z
l
t
e
l
d
y
S
G
a
n
ry
Ez
od
Ita
Sa
-Co
Be
ala
ific
Pet
El&
Pre
roC
Ze
ass
l
bory
A
Eu
t
w
C
A
e
e
M
P
N
FE

AS

Figure 3.3.6. Comparison with other drift limits for various damage thresholds.

Discussion
Furthermore, the difference between the threshold obtained for masonry with
fired-clay or calcium-silicate units should be discussed. In both cases, the
mortar joints and size of the units is similar, but the material of the bricks
differs. The drift at which light damage can be considered to start is about the
same; yet, the drift at which light damage is exceeded is about 40% lower for
the calcium-silicate units. This means that calcium-silicate brick masonry is more
vulnerable to in-plane inter-storey drift, which might be related to the cracking
behaviour that includes brick-splitting cracks and fewer, but wider cracks.

Chapter 3

Ultimate Drift

104

Chapter 3

Whether CaSi structures experience or develop equal inter-storey drifts when
subjected to damaging actions such as vibrations or settlements and would
exhibit thus more damage, still requires additional study. It is likely that such
structures, usually in a more modern context with reinforced foundations, rigid
floor diaphragms, and updated design and building methods, will better
control inter-storey drift.
Finally, the drift limits obtained are linked to the thresholds set for the values of
Ψ. A lower Ψ value marking the transition between incipient and light damage
will also result in a lower drift value for this threshold. However, this also
depends on the available experimental data which is most dense at lower Ψ
values. For the upper threshold, clustering of the data was used to determine
Ψ=4; yet, this threshold is not very sensitive, with values between 3.7 and 4.0
leading to essentially identical upper drift limits (though different in terms of
model accuracy). In terms of related cracks, with more than one crack at least 5
mm wide, this upper threshold is also reasonable and comparable to popular
damage scales.
The threshold for the beginning of light damage is more sensitive. The strictest
formulations consider a crack width of 0.1 mm (Ψ=1), just visible cracks, and
some begin at 1 mm (Ψ=2). Multiple cracks also affect the value of Ψ, so three
cracks of 0.5 mm will already reach Ψ=1.9. This seems like a reasonable
compromise to consider a realistic start of light damage without falling into the
most rigorous definition. Moreover, this value is associated with the best model
prediction parameters.

3.3.5. Summary of Drift Limits for Light Damage
Results from experimental campaigns on masonry walls have been
reinterpreted by post-processing digital image correlation measurements into a
crack-based metric and relating it to the in-plane drift of the walls at every
measurement instance. Then, the relationship between drift and damage has
been explored using a classification model where other predictors are
considered. Besides drift, which was found to be highly correlated to damage,
the wall type and its material, the boundary of the experimental setup, and the
progress of the test were found to be linked to damage. The latter considered
that repeated values of drift, occurring later in the tests, were linked to slightly
higher damage. Similarly, walls with a cantilever boundary could sustain a
slightly larger drift before displaying the same intensity of crack damage than
walls subjected to a double-clamped boundary. Moreover, shear walls
displayed larger cracks than walls with an opening at similar drift. Analogously,
calcium-silicate (CaSi) walls showed more intense damage than fired-clay brick

Experiments about Cracks

105

These thresholds may be used directly when designing for performance goals
that limit ‘significant damage’ or even address the serviceability limit state.
Older structures, or masonry that is expected to have been subjected to a large
number of load repetitions, should be evaluated with slightly reduced drift
values (about 10%). Likewise, shear walls, or squat walls connected to rigid
floors and foundations, should also consider limits reduced by a similar
amount.
Finally, it must be highlighted that these experimentally-derived limits are still
related to decisions about the crack-based boundaries for light damage, which
inevitably remain somewhat arbitrary. Moreover, future tests should consider
additional repetitions to obtain richer drift data around the upper threshold of
light damage, which is now slightly scarce. Similarly, additional experiments
with varying wall slenderness ratios, could offer a further refinement of the
simplified drift limits by incorporating a parameter besides wall material that
can be directly used in practice.

3.4. Conclusions: Experiments to Understand Crack Behaviour
Chapter 3 presents a comprehensive study on the initiation and propagation of
cracks in masonry, aiming to understand the mechanics behind crack formation
and growth. Central to this investigation are laboratory experiments designed
to observe crack formation in masonry under various test conditions, extending
from small scale tests for assessing the bond between masonry units to large
scale tests including full masonry assemblages; the chapter focuses on walls
and spandrels.
The chapter details adaptations in traditional testing methods to focus on the
early stages of crack formation, emphasising the importance of a loading
protocol that slowly increases before reaching the initial damage stage (DS1)
and employing an instrumentation system capable of precisely tracking crack
development. This methodology allows for an in-depth understanding of crack
initiation and progression, highlighting the effects of repeated loading and the
significance of in-plane testing on walls to encourage crack formation around
openings.

Chapter 3

walls. In fact, when simplifying the classification model to consider only the drift
and the masonry material as predictors to establish drift limits for the interval of
light damage, CaSi masonry obtained an upper limit 40% lower than fired-clay
brick masonry, which exceeds light damage at a value of 0.5%. The upper
crack-based light damage threshold corresponds to about three cracks of 6
mm in width. The beginning of light damage, with visible cracks about 1 mm
wide, occurs at 0.5 and 0.6 ‰ for CaSi and clay, respectively.

106

Chapter 3

A significant conclusion of the chapter is the establishment of drift limits for
light damage based on the experimental observations. Through a detailed
classification model, the relationship between drift and the parameter Ψ
(representing crack intensity) is explored, defining lower and upper thresholds
for light damage. This approach provides a quantifiable measure to assess light
damage in masonry structures subjected to lateral loads, potentially guiding
the design and evaluation of masonry under load by requiring designers to
consider the lateral stiffness of the structures.
Chapter 3 highlights that cracks mostly initiate from the corners of openings or
at the lateral edges of walls. In the case of walls subjected to shear forces,
body cracks may also manifest. Most observed cracks were either horizontal or
step-wise diagonal, coalescing into a single crack from being spread over
multiple joints initially. The chapter discusses how the width and length of
cracks grow simultaneously, with a notable observation that cracks appear even
before they become visible, suggesting the presence of 'invisible' cracks that
could potentially propagate if conditions vary. Different types of cracks,
whether horizontal, diagonal, vertical, tapered, or uniform, exhibit similar
aggravation under increased loading. Moreover, the chapter concludes that
repetition affects crack propagation, where identical loading conditions lead to
measurable but consistent increases in crack width and length. These insights
provide a deeper understanding of crack behaviour in masonry, contributing to
better predictive models and mitigation strategies against crack-related
damage in masonry structures.
In summary, Chapter 3 advances the knowledge on crack dynamics in masonry
through methodical experimentation, contributing to the development of more
resilient masonry structures by defining drift limits for light damage and
enhancing our understanding of crack formation and propagation mechanisms.
The experimental results serve as a basis to calibrate models that, besides the
traditional calibration parameters of stiffness, strength, and hysteresis, also
strongly consider crack patterns and behaviour.

107

Chapter 4

This chapter begins with a short overview about hazards and the way they act
on buildings, Sections 4.1 and 4.2 respectively. Then, Section 4.3 goes back to
the experiments of Chapter 3 and reproduces them with finite-element-method
models. This is a model calibration conducted in collaboration with other
authors [1, 4; see List of Publications] focused, in contrast to most studies, to
reproducing crack patterns and behaviour during light damage.
The calibrated models are then used in Section 4.4 to illustratively model
various actions related to (multi-)hazards relevant to Dutch buildings in
preparation for their key purpose in Chapter 5.

Chapter 4

Damaging (Multi)Hazards
and Modelling their Effects

108

Chapter 4

Chapter 4: Table of Contents
Calibrating models is not only about defining a modelling strategy that works.
The ultimate goal is to have models that can be used to analyse situations that
were not, or could not be, tested experimentally; these are extrapolations.
The various loads to be included in models of structures are typically caused by
hazards. Therefore, this chapter begins with a definition and overview of
hazards followed by a more rigorous description on their actions on masonry
buildings.
The models, calibrated against the experiments, are then used to analyse the
effects of some of the hazards presented. This is done in preparation for
Chapter 5, where the calibrated models are used to analyse the effect of
earthquake vibrations.
4.1. Hazards and Multi-hazards
109
4.1.1. Hazards .............................................................................................110
4.1.2. Multi-hazards ....................................................................................111
4.2. Overview of Actions causing Damage to Masonry Buildings
113
4.2.1. Vibrations ..........................................................................................114
4.2.2. Restrained Deformations ..................................................................115
4.2.3. Imposed Deformations .....................................................................115
4.2.4. Out of Plane Loading ........................................................................115
4.2.5. Gravity Overloading .........................................................................116
4.3. Calibrating Crack Behaviour from Experiments into FEM Models
117
4.3.1. Background on Validation Experiments ............................................118
4.3.2. Overview of Calibration Models .......................................................119
4.3.3. Model Properties and Boundaries ....................................................120
4.3.4. Calibration of Spandrels and Walls with Openings ..........................125
4.3.5. Additional Model for Walls with Pre-Damage ..................................130
4.3.6. FEM Model for Shear Walls ..............................................................133
4.3.7. Conclusions from the Calibration Process ........................................137
4.4. Modelling Damage: Shrinkage, Settlements, and Vibrations
139
4.4.1. Modelling Restrained Deformations: Shrinkage ...............................139
4.4.2. Modelling Imposed Deformations: Settlements ...............................141
4.4.3. Dynamic, Non-Linear Time History Analysis: Vibrations ...................143
4.4.4. Modelling Multi-hazards ...................................................................146
4.5. Conclusions: Modelling and Calibration

147

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

109

4.1. Hazards and Multi-hazards
A hazard constitutes a danger to a structure but differs from an action.
Traditionally, natural hazards are identified, such as storms or floods, but many
anthropogenic hazards, such as terrorist attacks, fires or simply traffic, are also
relevant. Any effect that can act on a structure is a hazard. People in a building,
because of their weight, represent a hazard. While the building is sufficiently
designed for the ‘normal’ loads of this hazard, an extreme number of people in
a building could lead to overloading.

Definition: Hazard
In structural engineering, a hazard refers to any condition, event, or factor that
has the potential to cause harm to structures, infrastructure, or the occupants
of buildings. Structures are typically designed to withstand the effects of (some)
hazards. In many cases, the function of a structure is to withstand a particular
hazard. Bridges are designed to handle traffic and wind, buildings are
constructed to resist the weight of people and rain, dykes are built to endure
waves and erosion. All of these are hazards.
Definition: Action
The action of a hazard is how it affects structures. While the storm is the hazard,
the wind pressure on the face of a building is its associated action. Similarly, fire
is a hazard, but the action on the structure is described as a temperature
increase or gradient on structural elements. Loadings and actions are mostly
synonyms, though the term ‘loads’ is typically employed to describe the forces
and strains (vectors, pressures) acting on the structure.

Chapter 4

A multi-hazard involves more than one hazard while a single hazard is that
which could appear independently. A hazard can act in several ways on a
structure. For example, a storm may include wind and rain, and a flood could
include hydrostatic or hydrodynamic pressures. Many hazards are linked to a
single action, however; for example, a seismic event will lead to vibrations
which could also originate from traffic. The actions associated with various
hazards are treated in Section 4.2; the hazards are summarised next.

110

Chapter 4

4.1.1. Hazards
The following is a list of hazards. The list focuses on hazards relevant to
buildings and infrastructure, and is unlikely to be complete. While the hazards
have been distinguished by their natural or anthropogenic character, many of
the natural hazards can have anthropogenic triggers or be induced by human
activities. For example, seismic events, ground subsidence or even wildfires.
Natural hazards
• seismic activity (earthquakes)
• flooding (heavy rainfall, storm surges, river overflows)
• high winds (hurricanes, tornadoes, severe thunderstorms)
• landslides and mudslides
• tsunamis
• snow and ice accumulation
• volcanic eruptions
• hailstorms
• (extreme) temperatures (cold and heat)
• soil subsidence
• physical or chemical soil changes
• erosion (coastal and riverbank)
• lightning strikes
• wildfires
Anthropogenic (human-made) hazards:
• induced seismicity (mining, geothermal, fracking)
• fire (electrical faults, gas leaks, arson, accidents)
• industrial accidents (chemical spills, blasts, explosions)
• terrorism (bombings, vehicle attacks)
• infrastructure failures (water supply, sewage systems, gas lines)
• aging and neglect (lack of maintenance and repairs, incorrect repairs)
• inadequate renovations (removal of structural elements, etc)
• construction, pile driving, heavy machinery
• excavations, mining, tunnelling
The intensity of hazards can be related to a parameter than can be measured;
some examples are provided in Table 4.1.1.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

111

Table 4.1.1. Examples of hazards and some describing parameters with a qualitative
intensity categorisation. Adapted from Korswagen et al. (2018), Loat (2010) and Menoni
(2016).

Earthquake

Flood
Forest Fire
Volcanoes

Description

Intensity
Unit

Low

Medium

High

PGA

% of g

<10

10-30

>30

PGV

mm/s

<5

5-20

>20

Depth

m

<0.5

0.5-2

>2

Depth·Velocity

m2/s

<0.5

0.5-2

>2

Flame height

m

<1.2

1.2-2.5

>2.5

Front line power

kW/m

<350

350-1750

>1750

Mass eruption rate

kg/s

<102

102-106

>106

Rate (cm/y or cm/d)

cm

<2/y

>10/y

>10/d

Landslide

Ratio of unstable over stable
surface

-

<5

5-15

>15

Debris Flow

Depth & Velocity

m & m/s

n.d.

<1 & <1

>1 & >1

Avalanche

Pressure

kPa

<3

3-10

>10

Rock Fall

Energy

kJ

<30

30-300

>300

4.1.2. Multi-hazards
One hazard can also act together with other hazards. Sometimes these happen
to occur simultaneously; or, they act on the structure in sequence but are not
related to one another. For example, a wind storm could act on a building after
it has been subjected to neighbouring construction activity. These hazards are
unrelated and could occur at precisely the same time, compounding their
effect on a structure, or most likely, one after another, in which case the earlier
hazard could have damaged the structure modifying its response to the
following hazard. This represents a multi-hazard analysis.
Simple multi-hazard analyses are embedded into regular structural design in
the form of load combinations. For a thorough analysis, hazards behind these
loads, especially when considering extreme or accidental loads, should be
disentangled.
In some cases the hazards are related. For example, an earthquake may trigger
a tsunami. These are coupled or chained multi-hazards. The matrix in Table
4.1.1 draws relationships between various hazards where the primary hazard
can trigger the secondary hazard. This multi-hazard analysis is more specific as
the hazard combinations are limited.

Chapter 4

Intensity Parameter

Hazard

112

Chapter 4

Table 4.1.2 Interaction of Hazards. Adapted from Korswagen et al. (2018) & Gill (2014).
Secondary Hazards (as a result of PH)

Primary Hazards
PH

EA

TS

VE

LS

AV

FL

GC

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Earthquakes

EA

Tsunamis

TS

Volcanic Eruptions

VE

Landslides

LS

Avalanches

AV

●

●

Floods

FL

●

●

Ground Collapse

GC

●

(Wind) Storm

WS

●

●

●

Hail/Snow Storm

SS

●

●

●

Wildfires

WF

●

Ash Deposition

AD

●

Fires

FR

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

WS

SS

WF

AD

FR

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

In fact, for Dutch buildings, only certain multi-hazards (coupled or uncoupled)
are relevant or worthy of study. For example, volcanic eruptions are not
possible and consequently, significant ash deposition is unlikely. These hazards
are thus not relevant. Soil subsidence and windstorms, on the other hand,
typically affect buildings, and are examples or more relevant hazards for the
Dutch context.
More so, those hazards are associated with a limited number of actions. These
actions and their typically-associated hazards are treated next.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

113

4.2. Overview of Actions causing Damage to Masonry
102

Chapter 4

While many hazards can be noted, the number of actions on buildings is
While
many
hazards
be noted,
the number
of actions
on buildings
is limited.
limited.
Table
4.2.1cancollects
mechanical
actions,
or possible
loading,
on
Table 4.2.1 collects mechanical actions, or possible loading, on buildings. Note
buildings. Note that these actions are related to crack-based damage; other
that these actions are related to crack-based damage; other processes resulting
processes resulting from hazards can be linked to other types of damage (see
from hazards can be linked to other types of damage (see Chapter 2). The location
Chapter 2). The location and intensity of the actions will depend on the hazard
and intensity of the actions will depend on the hazard associated with it. For
associated with it. For instance, wind and floods both cause out-of-plane
instance, wind and floods both cause out-of-plane loading on buildings walls;
loading on buildings walls; however, floods apply pressure at the bottom of the
however, floods apply pressure at the bottom of the walls while wind loads are
walls while wind loads are better represented with a higher pressure at the top.
better represented with a higher pressure at the top. The quasi-static ground
The quasi-static
movements
fromlead
subsidence
phenomena
lead on
to
movements
from ground
subsidence
phenomena
to imposed
deformations
imposed
deformations
on
buildings,
but
different
hazards
will
lead
to
(either)
buildings, but different hazards will lead to (either) horizontal or vertical
horizontal or vertical
resulting
in different
types while
of settlements.
deformations,
resultingdeformations,
in different types
of settlements.
As such,
actions are
As
such,
while
actions
are
similar,
hazards
can
be
associated
with
similar, hazards can be associated with different failure mechanisms;
seedifferent
de Vent
failure mechanisms;
see deare
Vent
(2011). These
differences
consideredSeveral
in the
(2011).
These differences
considered
in the
followingare
subsections.
following
subsections.
Several
examples
and
situations
are
presented.
examples and situations are presented. Nonetheless, this does not constitute an
Nonetheless,
does not
exhaustive
northis
complete
list.constitute an exhaustive nor complete list.

(Wild)fires

Hail/Snow Storm

(Wind) Storm

Pile Driving

●

●

●
●

Gravity Overloading

Floods

●

Out of plane pressure
●

●

●
●

Vibrations

Avalanches

Landslides

Renovation / Expansions

Extreme Temperatures

●

Material Shrinkage

●

Traffic

Restrained
deformations

Local soil subsidence

Imposed deformations

Regional subsidence

Actions | Hazards

Earthquakes

Table 4.2.1.
4.2.1. Hazards
Hazardsrelevant
relevanttotothe
theDutch
Dutch
context
and
associated
mechanical
actions.
Table
context
and
associated
mechanical
actions.

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

In
computational modelling,
loads and
and aa similar
similar
In computational
modelling, actions
actions are
are translated
translated into
into loads
terminology
is
used.
Imposed
deformations
loads,
temperature
and
shrinkage
terminology is used. Imposed deformations loads, temperature and shrinkage
loads,
or or
surface),
andand
nodal
loadsloads
are some
of the of
terms.
loads, distributed
distributedloads
loads(line
(line
surface),
nodal
are some
the
Restrained
deformations
are
the
result
of
a
constraining
boundary
and
inner
strains
terms. Restrained deformations are the result of a constraining boundary and
derived
from derived
temperature
shrinkage loads.
inner strains
fromor
temperature
or shrinkage loads.

Chapter 4

Buildings
4.2. Overview of Actions causing Damage to Masonry Buildings

114

Chapter 4

Figure 4.2.1. Overview of various actions on buildings. Imposed deformations,
restrained deformations, overloading, vibrations, and out-of-plane loading.

4.2.1. Vibrations
Dutch buildings in general are often subjected to vibrations. These are caused
by traffic from nearby roads or railroad tracks, construction activities such as
pile driving, wind storms, household activities (such as walking, drilling or
slamming doors/windows), and earthquakes. Vibrations are quick, dynamic
deformations of building components. Jumping on a wooden floor, for
example, causes vibrations that can be easily perceived. Unless inadequately
designed, buildings should withstand vibrations from normal use. Therefore,
the hazards from outside sources, or hazards unforeseen at design, are the
focus of most studies on the effect of vibrations on buildings.
The intensity of the vibrations will depend on the distance of the building to
the source. Road traffic vibrations die out quickly with distance, followed by
railroad-induced vibrations, and pile driving, with seismic events leading to
vibrations that occur over a larger area. This type of vibrations reach the
structure via its foundation. However, they can differ in several aspects. Seismic
vibrations typically occur uniformly over the entire building foundation, while
other sources lead to non-uniform vibrations over the entire foundation.
Moreover, vibrations from pile driving usually induce mostly vertical dynamic
deformations while distant earthquake events lead to more important
horizontal deformations. Similarly, the intensity of the vibrations can be
measured in various ways; the peak ground velocity, its duration, the number of
effective cycles and the frequency content of the vibrations will differ
depending on the responsible hazard.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

115

4.2.2. Restrained Deformations
Building components sometimes need to expand or contract. This is the case
for instance, when they are subjected to a temperature increase. Most
materials expand proportionally to the temperature increase. Similarly, some
materials swell with increases in humidity such as calcium-silicate masonry or
timber subjected to moisture. In many situations however, these deformations
are constrained. Other building components limit the deformation possible.
For example, a recently built masonry wall attempting to shrink over a rigid
concrete foundation, will not be able to deform. This limitation leads to
stresses in the wall and in the foundation.
In addition, many materials experience creep, like concrete or masonry, where
sustained loads lead to plastic deformations over time. Other materials, like
steel, are subjected to a similar phenomenon of relaxation, where stresses,
product of an imposed deformation, decrease over time.

Opposite to restrained deformations, imposed deformations force structural
components to deform. This leads to stresses and potential damage. When
other building components shrink or expand, they may be restrained by other
elements; in this scenario, one component is forced to deform while the other
is constrained. However, imposed deformations can also have outside sources.
Settlements, for instance, are the result of a loss of support underneath the
foundation of buildings; then, the weight of the building itself forces structural
components like walls, to deform, imposing displacements. An external driver
in the soil, or a result of detrimental soil-structure interaction or buildingcomponent interactions, are also possible situations.
Imposed deformations on certain structural elements are usually restrained by
other building components. This interaction can quickly become complex
requiring extensive analyses.

4.2.4. Out of Plane Loading
Walls can be subjected to loads perpendicular to their plane. These actions
often belong to hazards. Three hazards are noteworthy: wind, floods, and
earthquakes. The former apply pressures on the walls, which are most sensitive
for out-of-plane pressures. The latter accelerate the building vertically and
horizontally. Due to the inertia of the walls themselves, the earthquake leads to
an out-of-plane (OOP) distributed load. Wind loads are seldom intense enough
to affect walls; roofs instead are usually lifted up.

Chapter 4

4.2.3. Imposed Deformations

116

Chapter 4

Buildings components for housing are fragile against out-of-plane loading.
Thin, unreinforced walls will fail once their OOP capacity is exceeded.

4.2.5. Gravity Overloading
Overloading is a general term. In essence, any mechanical damage is a
consequence of overloading of the material. However, by gravity overloading,
one should understand the scenario when gravity loads exceed the design load
of the structure. This can occur during a renovation, when heavy finishing floors
are laid over structural timber floors. Natural hazards such as snow or heavy
rain can accumulate on the roofs of structures and cause overloading. Similarly,
an earthquake with a strong vertical component could lead to gravity
overloading.

Figure 4.2.2. A scheme of masonry wall subjected to (top left) shrinkage, a deformation
with is restrained by the stiff foundation, and (top right) out-of-plane loads resulting in
two-way bending. Bottom, a spandrel, between two walls experiencing a relative
displacement leading to bending in the spandrel. The schematic location of cracks is
highlighted.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

117

4.3. Calibrating Crack Behaviour from Experiments into FEM
Models
Hazards and actions have been presented. The goal is to model the effects of
these hazards. To do this, however, an intermediate step is needed: to develop
accurate models with which to do this. That is the focus of this section.

Effective modelling strategies also need to be defined. These are validated
against experiments. The models are formulated such that they reproduce the
behaviour observed in experiments. Hence, to model the effects of hazards
accurately, calibrated models are required. These reproduce the behaviour
observed in experiments or in monitored field cases and can then be adopted
to model the actions of hazards.
Certainly, the experiments of Chapter 3 can be used to calibrate models. The
calibration process is presented in this section. These models were elaborated
in collaboration with other authors [1, 4, 12]. The experiments provide valuable
data for the calibration of finite element models; in this manner, this section
builds up on the results from the laboratory tests and describes and discusses
the modelling approach used to elaborate models that are capable of
reproducing the cracking behaviour of masonry specimens and which later, in
Chapter 5, will be used to predict the cumulation of damage from various
actions in a probabilistic manner.
The first step is to understand the experiments upon which the modelling
calibration process is to be based. The experiments are summarised in one
page in section 4.3.1. Next, an overview of the models employed for the
calibration is laid out in section 4.3.2. Multiple models of various experiments
are required to comprehensively define an effective modelling strategy; the
overview is further expanded in section 4.3.3 with the description of the
models. The various models are then treated in sections 4.3.4 to 4.3.6.

Chapter 4

Indeed, to assess the effects of actions on structures, not only are good models
and estimations of actions needed, but a complete understanding of the
structure, and its (mechanical) response to the actions, is also necessary. A
simple, linear-elastic model of a structure, for instance of a beam, may only
require its stiffness (Young’s Modulus) and its dimensions. More complex
models however, involve many more material parameters, especially non-linear
models with other physical non-linearities. These parameters follow from
thorough material characterisation campaigns assaying stiffness, strength, and
toughness for tension, shear, and compression.

118

Chapter 4

4.3.1. Background on Validation Experiments
The quasi-static, cyclic experiments were presented in Chapter 3. The most
relevant aspects are briefly summarised in this short subsection for clarity: Five
nominally identical, single-wythe walls of fired-clay brick masonry
approximately 3.1 metres wide and 2.7 m tall with an asymmetrically-placed
window opening were tested quasi-statically in-plane by enforcing a controlled
displacement at the top of the walls. The walls were pre-loaded vertically to
produce an average stress of 0.12 MPa resembling moderate vertical loads; the
top of the wall was allowed to rotate freely mimicking a ‘cantilever’
configuration. The in-plane displacement was applied cyclically with repeated
steps of increasing amplitude; the surface of the walls was surveyed with Digital
Image Correlation (DIC) to detect and monitor the formation and progression
of cracks at a resolution of 20 µm. Two additional walls of identical material
without a window opening [3] were tested at a higher vertical overburden of
0.46 MPa and a ‘double-clamped’ configuration, meaning that the bottom and
top edges of the walls were kept parallel during the tests. The first set of walls
were seen to correspond to the flexural behaviour, while the latter represented
the shear behaviour of masonry walls. Furthermore, two walls with a window
opening and pre-damaged crack interfaces [4] were tested in a manner
identical to that of the five walls with opening for a window. The pre-damaged
interfaces were achieved by incorporating a PVC sheet on some mortar joints
strategically located at the corners of the window opening. The built-in predamaged pattern was designed to mimic cracking caused by a differential
settlement profile and was determined with numerical models and assessment
of real case studies [6].
The tests imposed in-plane drifts to the walls of up to 0.1% with some cracks
reaching a width of up to 2 mm. The cracks were observed to propagate when
identical drifts were enforced repeatedly, though greater crack growth occurred
at cycles of amplitude larger than that of the preceding cycle. Pre-existing
cracks modified the initial stiffness of the wall and the ultimate crack pattern
slightly [4]. Cracks in the flexural walls were mostly horizontal and stair-casediagonal and propagated off from the corners of the window opening, while
cracks in the windowless shear walls were mostly diagonal but steeper than the
stair-case motif and started off from the centre of the walls.
Additionally, ten spandrel-type wallets 1.5 m in width and 0.5 m in height were
tested in a four-point bending setup such that a flexural vertical crack would
cross the specimens in the centre. The cracks were observed to zig-zag around
the mortar joints of the fired-clay brick masonry resulting in a toothed crack
pattern.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

119

Finally, small companion tests like the bond-wrench test, the shear-triplet test,
the compression wallet test, and flexural four-point bending tests in-plane and
out-of-plane, were used to determine the material properties of the masonry.

To enhance the understanding of experimental tests and apply their findings to
various masonry walls, structures, and different load scenarios beyond
laboratory capabilities, finite element computational models have been
developed and fine-tuned based on experimental data. The modelling of the
walls was approached in two ways: first, through a continuum model that
combines bricks and mortar into a single composite material for macro-level
modelling; and second, by modelling bricks and mortar separately. In the latter
approach, while zero-thickness interface elements are commonly used between
bricks and mortar, this study employs continuum elements to represent the
mortar, thus characterising this approach as a modified micro model. For
further details on masonry modelling techniques, readers can refer to the works
of Rots et al. (1994), Lourenço (1996), and Lourenço et al. (1997).
Most modelling studies focus on ULS and the ultimate capacity of masonry
elements considering large displacements and severe damage; see for instance
Rots et al. (1997), Chong (1993), Rots (2000), and Zucchini & Lourenço (2006).
These studies are monotonic as are many of the investigations into in-plane
loading of masonry. Yet, while the majority of experimental studies do consider
the cyclic behaviour (Magenes & Calvi, 1992), few modelling studies do so
extensively. Zhai et al. (2016), Mariani et al. (2017), Messali & Rots (2018), and
Sarhosis et al. (2019) are useful examples of modelling including cyclic
behaviour. The modelling strategies typically include continuum, homogenised
material models (Pelà et al. 2014), or even larger elements like various macroelement approaches to represent the behaviour of entire masonry walls o
structures (Cannizzaro et al. 2018).
In contrast, this study focuses on SLS with small displacements occurring up
until before the maximum capacity of masonry walls. The observation of crack
propagation, especially during cyclic loading, plays a major role. Moreover, a
novel material model is employed to focus on cracking. Additionally, a micromodelling strategy is investigated (Almeida, 2012; Ferretti et al. 2018, Rapone
et al. 2020).
The micro model, despite being more resource-intensive, allows for a more
detailed analysis of cracks. Therefore, it is preferred for smaller, more detailed
studies; where computational resources are a constraint, the macro model is
more applicable. However, for specific applications like the window-bank test,

Chapter 4

4.3.2. Overview of Calibration Models

120

Chapter 4

where the size of the bricks relative to the sample size is critical, the macro
model may not yield as accurate results. As a result, both macro and micro
models of the full-scale walls have been developed, with only the micro model
being adjusted for the window-bank tests. The micro-model for the spandrels
served to help calibrate the micro model for the walls, which in turn, was used
to further refine the macro model for the walls. Ultimately, the last model is
used in Chapter 5 for the probabilistic explorations. All models were created
using the DIANA finite element software.
Table 4.3.1. Overview of models used for calibration.
Model
Walls with
Opening

Approach

Comment

Homogenised model
Main models
(macro approach)

Experiments
Comp40Comp43

Section

Detailed model
(micro approach)

Cross-validation

Spandrels

Detailed model
(micro approach)

Focus on vertical
cracking

Walls with
pre-damage

Homogenised model Focus on the influence Comp45,
(macro approach)
of pre-damage
Comp46

4.3.5

Shear walls

Focus on shear and
Homogenised model
double-clamped
(macro approach)
boundary

4.3.6

4.3.3 and 4.3.4

Spandrels

Comp47,
Comp48

4.3.3. Model Properties and Boundaries
This subsection details the calibrated model properties and the replicated
experimental boundaries for both wall and spandrel models.
Wall Macro Model
Computational models that had been used to predict the behaviour of the
experiments were then improved based on the experimental results to (partly)
replicate the observed degradation and better reflect the observed stiffness
and crack patterns. As constitutive material model, a smeared, total-strain
Engineering Masonry Model (EMM), recently developed by TU Delft and
DIANA FEA, see Rots et al. (2016) and Schreppers et al. (2016), was chosen for
the elaboration of the macro (or continuum) model with homogenises the
properties of the masonry (bricks and joints) into a continuum. The EMM
accounts for the orthotropy from bed and head joints, tensile softening with
secant unloading, shear friction and cohesion softening with elastic unloading,
and compression hardening and softening with bilinear elastic-secant
unloading. This makes it particularly suited for the cyclic aspect of repetition.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

121

Moreover, the orthotropy is key in capturing the behaviour of masonry where
bricks are laid in bed joints making the horizontal behaviour different from the
vertical. Furthermore, the elastic unloading during shear captures sliding at the
bedjoints, an important masonry failure mechanism.

Chapter 4

The model of the wall includes a linear-elastic, uncracked concrete lintel (E=31
GPa), linear beam elements for the bottom and top beams, a fixed boundary at
the bottom, and is displacement-driven at the top (see Figure 4.3.1).

Figure 4.3.1. Finite Element Model showing mesh and boundaries.

Further calibrating the material parameters allowed for results loyal to the
experiments. The employed and calibrated parameters for the material model
are displayed in Table 4.3.2. Note that the EMM requires the specification of
the angle at which stair-case cracks will travel diagonally in masonry, this is
related to the geometry of the brick and the masonry pattern (dutch bond,
english bond, etc). Moreover, it also requires parameters relating to the
compressive strength and softening of masonry, but these did not play a role in
any of the models as no compression failure was observed in the tests nor in
the models. The light-damage oriented experiments only displayed Mode I
tensile fracture and Mode II shear fracture and slip.

122

Chapter 4

These properties are applicable to all the models, including the shear walls and
the walls with pre-damage. A summary of the model features is listed next:
• Wall with/without opening from
fired-clay brick masonry,
• Dimensions: 3.05x2.70x0.10m,
• 2D Plane Stress Model,
• Bottom (HEB300) and top (HEB600)
beam modelled using beam
elements,
• 8-Node Quadratic Elements,
• 3x3 Integration scheme,

• 0.12MPa overburden,
• Mesh size 50x50mm,
• Full Newton-Raphson scheme with
force or displacement norms with a
1% residual tolerance for
convergence.
• Displacement control, small step size
• Constitutive model: EMM

Table 4.3.2. Material properties for FEM models using the EMM.

Elastic

Tension

Compression

Shear

EMM

Material Properties

Clay Masonry

Density

1600 kg/m3 1

Elastic Modulus Perpendicular to Bed-Joints

3600 MPa

1

Elastic Modulus Parallel to Bed-Joints

2500 MPa

1

Elastic Shear Modulus

1 500 MPa

2

Bed-Joint Tensile Strength

0.16 MPa

1

Minimum Head-Joint Tensile Strength

0.16 MPa

2

Tensile Fracture Energy

11.30 N/m

3

Vertical/Horizontal Compressive Strength

12.9 MPa

1

Vertical/Horizontal Compressive Fracture Energy

35 600 N/m 1

Friction Angle (Friction Coefficient)

1

Cohesion

0.69 rad
(0.82)
0.17
MPa

Shear Fracture Energy

210 N/m

1

Head Joint Failure Option

Friction
Based
0.50
rad

1

Predefined Angle for Diagonal Cracking
1. From companion tests (material characterisation)
2. From calibration
3. From formulation (Schreppers et al., 2016)

1

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

123

Wall Micro Model

Furthermore, it is possible to differentiate between the mortar in the head
joints and that in the bed joints. The former being of lower quality (or strength)
due to the construction practice where head joints are filled in-between bricks,
while bed joints are pressed with the bricks above it. Since the mortar is a
homogenous material, a total-strain-based, rotating crack model was used. As
its name suggests, this model has a single direction for a stress-strain
relationship which rotates in the direction of the principal strain. See Vecchio
et al. (1986), Rots et al. (1989), or Feenstra et al., (1998).
The EMM was also explored as a constitutive model for the mortar. Since its
loading/unloading design is well suited for the cyclic behaviour of the mortar
joint, and because the modelled mortar must include the behaviour of the
interfaces ‘brick-mortar’ which are inherently oriented on the horizontal-vertical
axes. However, the EMM requires a larger number of parameters which must
also be calibrated. For the monotonic comparison between micro- and macromodelling strategies, the total-strain model for the joints was deemed
sufficient.
Indeed, since the micro model is computationally expensive, it was calibrated
only against the monotonic backbone curve of the experiments and a stepwise
loading with a single repetition (one-way cyclic). Additional properties in
comparison to the macro model are:
• Dimensions: 3.07x2.70x0.10m,
• Brick size: 210x50x100mm,
• Mortar thickness: 10mm,
• 2D Plane Stress Model,
• 4-Node Linear Elements,
• 2x2 Integration scheme,

• Mesh Size: 10x10mm,
• Full Newton-Raphson scheme with
force and displacement conditions
with a 1% residual tolerance for
convergence.

Chapter 4

In addition to the macro model, a detailed model was explored as crossvalidation. The micro model differs from the macro model in that bricks and
mortar are modelled independently, each with their own material properties
(see Figure 4.3.2). Since damage was rarely in bricks, these are modelled linearelastically, significantly improving the computation time of the model and its
simplicity. Moreover, since no interface is used between the bricks and the
mortar, all non-linear properties are gathered in the mortar; here, the strength
of the bond between brick and mortar is used as the strength of the mortar.

124

Chapter 4

Table 4.3.3. Calibrated properties for the micro model.
Property

Symbol

Bed Joints

Head Joints Bricks

Units

Density

ρ

1708 1

1708 1 kg/m3

Young’s Modulus

E

1000 2

4600 2

MPa

Poisson’s Ration

υ

0.14 1

0.14 1

-

Tensile Strength

ft

0.09 1

0.05 2

NA

MPa

Fracture Energy (Tension)

GIf

7.53 3

4.99 3

NA

N/m

Compressive Strength

fc

3.81 1

NA

MPa

Fracture Energy (Compression)

GC

6400 2

NA

N/m

Shear Retention

-

Damage Based 4

NA

-

1. From companion tests (material characterisation)
2. From calibration
3. From formulation (Schreppers et al., 2016)
4. Reduction of Poisson’s ratio. See Slobbe et al., (2013).

Window Bank Micro Model (Spandrel)
Due to the reduced size of the spandrels, these were modelled only with the
micro-modelling approach. As both the wall and window bank tests served for
the same material calibration, these material properties are identical to those
used for the full-scale wall micro models. The spandrel was modelled including
the contact steel plates for the supports, jacks, and counterweights. The
specific model properties are listed next:
• Dimensions: 1.31x0.53x0.10m,
• Counterweight as line force,
• 2D Plane Stress Model,
• Monotonic Displacement,
• Steel plates, E=200 GPa,
• Mesh size 10x10mm.

Figure 4.3.2. Spandrel FEM model.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

125

Preface to Sections 4.3.4 - 4.3.6
Three calibration campaigns were performed. First, the walls with openings
and the spandrels were used to establish some of the material properties and
modelling strategy. This was also complemented by the micro-models of both
walls and spandrels {4.3.4}. Second, the two walls with openings and predamage were further utilised to verify the selected parameters and strategy
{4.3.5}. Third, the two walls without openings (shear walls), served as a final
calibration opportunity {4.3.6}. The overview of these phases was presented in
Table 4.3.1.

The focus of the calibration efforts was on the stiffness and strength of the
samples, while also capturing the observed crack pattern. In Figure 4.3.3, the
calibration against two wall specimens is summarised. It can be observed that
the stiffness and strength are both well represented, that there is a loss of
strength after the first unloading, and while the hysteresis of the experiments is
also well depicted, the degradation observed during the repetitions is not
reproduced with the models, mainly because it is also not present in the
material model. In the figure the dashed lines appear solid due to the overlay
of the repetitions in the cyclic analyses. The inclusion of (cyclic) degradation is
hence a point for future improvement (Bindiganavile, 2018).
Furthermore, monotonic analyses were performed. Here, the micro model is
more stable than the macro model when applying a monotonic loading
protocol (c) and is capable of reaching the degraded step points better (d), yet,
there is barely any damaged stiffness (or plastic deformation) at the later steps
(d); here the macro models fits the experiments more loyally (b), though for the
case of Comp41, the macro model overestimates the plastic deformations (a).
Note that the models of the walls with openings focus on Mode I cracks as
there is hardly any slip. Mode II cracking becomes more relevant for the shear
walls (Section 4.3.6).
In terms of crack patterns, both models represent the three main cracks
elegantly (Figure 4.3.4); however, for the case of Comp 41, no model shows the
observed crack pattern precisely. Yet, the micro model appears closer to the
experiments by displaying the staircase pattern at the bottom of the window,
and while it doesn’t show a horizontal crack at the top of the window, a
staircase crack was observed here in the other walls. This is most likely related
to the issue of mesh directional bias for smeared crack band models (e.g.
Slobbe et al., 2013) as is the macro model. In contrast to the macro model,

Chapter 4

4.3.4. Calibration of Spandrels and Walls with Openings

126

Chapter 4

where the narrowest crack computed was actually the largest in the test, for the
micro model, the relative crack width is closer to that of the experiments.
In sum, the micro model seems better suited for replicating the experimental
test. Especially when crack patterns are of importance, the micro-model
excels. Yet, there is an underestimation of the hysteresis, visible in 4.3.3.d likely
due to the secant loading/unloading of the total-strain model. This could be
remedied by using the EMM for the joints. Regardless, the micro-models is four
times more computationally expensive and requires some additional
parameters which may not be readily available. For this additional reason, the
macro-model is preferred.

Figure 4.3.3. Calibration force-displacement curves from the models based on two of
the test walls, a, b. Monotonic force-displacement curve from both macro and micro
models against the experimental backbone curve of wall, c ; and d, force-displacement
micro model with 5 steps of one repetition each against the experimental curve.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

127

0.7mm
0.5mm
Figure 4.3.4. Comparison between crack pattern from Macro-FEM, Micro-FEM, and
TUD-Comp 41 (Exp. DIC) at the end of the repetitive protocol.

Chapter 4

0.8mm

128

Chapter 4

Spandrels (Window Bank)
The calibration of the parameters for the material model was further
complemented by a replication of the spandrel tests. A set of the spandrels
tests were conducted monotonically and a larger set was tested repetitively
with up to 300 repetitions; see Chapter 3. Due to the computational expense
of the micro modelling approach employed, the models were calibrated only
against the monotonic spandrel tests. The inclusion of the repetitive tests is a
point for future improvement. Moreover, if the observed degradation can be
included in a homogenised material model, then a macro modelling approach
may also be possible for these tests.
Nevertheless, a good agreement was achieved between the models and the
experimental data (see Figure 4.3.4). Here, the initial stiffness, the maximum
strength, and the post-peak plateau were observed. In particular, the inversion
point of linear to non-linear behaviour (recognisable on the logarithmic scale
around 50µm of CMOD) matches the data beautifully. Note that the loss of
linearity occurs at approximately half the ultimate capacity of the specimens.
This was observed in the model to be related to the exceedance of crack
initiation strain for the elements located at the very top of the sample. It also
shows how cracks may arise long before the ultimate structural capacity is
reached thus leading to the aesthetic DS1.
Further, two variants for the stiffness of the linear-elastic bricks are plotted. The
lower Young’s modulus corresponds to the stiffness of masonry as a composite
material assigned to the brick, while the higher value of 8 GPa belongs to the
testing of individual bricks. In the models, a Young’s modulus of 1 GPa is given
to the mortar elements which represent the mortar and the two mortar-brick
interfaces, this value is kept the same for both variations of the brick stiffness.
The latter value of 8 GPa for the brick was observed to be slightly too stiff,
hence the lower value was also used. It is possible that the poor bond of the
replicated masonry leads to an even lower stiffness which is then better
captured by reducing the Young’s modulus of the bricks.
Additionally, the crack pattern determined by the models was also observed in
some of the monotonic tests as is shown in Figure 4.3.5. The spread of the
local material property values will affect the precise crack pattern in both
experiments and computations. Hence, the vertical crack would begin in one of
the three centre head joints.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

129

Chapter 4

Figure 4.3.5a. Calibration of a spandrel FE model against the monotonic spandrel tests
plotted on linear (left) and logarithmic (right) scales.

Figure 4.3.5b. Comparison of crack pattern against one of the monotonic spandrel
tests. Note that this particular experiment saw a vertical crack through a brick.

130

Chapter 4

4.3.5. Additional Model for Walls with Pre-Damage
This section presents the calibration of the FEM model for the two walls with
the local predamage from the unbonded joints. These walls feature joints with
reduced bond strength due to plastic strips left during construction, affecting
the brick-mortar interface. These zones have no tension and reduced sliding
strength. The continuum model mimics this by assigning inferior properties to
elements in these weakened areas. In Figure 4.3.6, these elements are marked
in a darker colour.
The material properties are identical to the previous walls as are the properties
of the steel beams. The focus was on aligning material model parameters with
those from smaller tests, too. The Young's modulus perpendicular to the bed
joints comes from compression tests on masonry wallets, while the parallel
modulus ratio (1.43) follows Jafari et al. (2016). The shear modulus G was
calibrated to match wall stiffness, with tensile strength from bond wrench tests
and fracture energy from
EMM validations (Schreppers et al., 2016).
Compressive strength and fracture energy values are extrapolated from
masonry wallet tests, with shear parameters from triplet tests. For the
weakened elements, elastic moduli are halved, tensile strength is zeroed, and
cohesion is reduced to 10% of standard. These values, while somewhat
arbitrary, lead to good results. The friction angle also decreases, simulating
brick-PVC interaction. Compression properties mirror the rest of the wall. The
numerical model's initial stiffness averages the stiffness of Comp 45 and 46
specimens, with Young's moduli already determined from tests.
The analysis has two phases: first, applying gravity load for 0.12 MPa precompression; second, introducing lateral displacement. The lateral support is
activated only in the second phase. Comparisons between numerical models
and the two walls (Comp 45 and 46) are presented in Figures 4.3.7 to 4.3.9.
Crack patterns are compared together with load-displacement responses
showing slightly overestimated capacities and underestimated energy
dissipation on the positive side. The calibration model correctly shows the
failure mechanism.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

131

Table 4.3.4. Model components properties of macro-model of TUD-Comp 45/46.
Element
Type

Number of
Nodes

Element
Order

Mesh Size

Integration
Scheme

Material

Virgin Masonry

CQ16M

8

Quadratic

50x50 mm

Gauss 3x3

EMM

Pre-damaged
Masonry

CQ16M

8

Quadratic

50x50 mm

Gauss 3x3

EMM

Lintel

CQ16M

8

Quadratic

50x50 mm

Gauss 3x3

Linear

Beams

CL9BE

3

Class-III

50 mm

Gauss 7

Linear

Chapter 4

Model
Component

Figure 4.3.6. FE model of Comp 45/46 with pre-damage as weakened elements.
Table 4.3.5. Material properties for the elastic elements.
Material Properties

Concrete Lintel

Steel Beam

Density [Kg/m3]

2 400

45 321

Elastic Modulus [MPa]

31 000

210 000

Poisson's Ratio [-]

0.20

0.30

Figure FEM Notation
Ecw1: Principal crack width from smeared crack strain and crack band width in
mm. Cohesion for shear: shear stress in MPa.

132

Chapter 4

Figure 4.3.7. Force-drift curve of FE model compared with the experimental Comp 46.
Drift is the ratio of horizontal deformation over the height of the wall in m/m.

a. Experiment Comp45 at 0.57‰

b. FEM Model

c. FEM Model Ecw1

d. FEM Model Shear

Figure 4.3.8a. a) DIC analysis of Comp46 at a drift of 0.57‰, one way cyclic. b to d: he
calibrated model at the same drift. (b) shows the interpreted cracks from the FE model.

133

a. Experiment Comp46 at 0.73‰

b. FEM Model

c. FEM Model Ecw1

d. FEM Model Shear

Figure 4.3.8b. a) Idem but for Comp45 at a drift of 0.73‰, end of two-way cyclic
protocol.

4.3.6. FEM Model for Shear Walls
The shear walls were also part of the calibration. The 2D plane stress model
depicts a massive, in-plane clay masonry shear wall without openings, mirroring
the dimensions of the other walls but without the opening. Similarly, it’s firmly
attached to steel beams at the top and bottom; both beams are modelled as
line elements with their actual cross-sections. At the top, the overburden
consists of a line load to generating a vertical stress of 0.46 MPa. The bottom
beam is restricted for two translations and in-plane rotation, while the top
beam is only constrained for in-plane rotation. Vertical “tyings” ensure the top
beam moves strictly vertically.
The model's initial stiffness, averaging 110.4 kN/mm from specimens Comp 47
and 48, is calculated using the masonry's elastic moduli in both directions and
a calibrated shear modulus G.
The analysis involves the two stages, gravity and imposed horizontal
deformation. The first phase applies gravity and pre-compression loads up to
0.46 MPa; the model's vertical loading response shows zero horizontal
displacement due to model symmetry and the Engineering Masonry Model's
zero Poisson's ratio formulation. Phase two resets the displacement field and

Chapter 4

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

134

Chapter 4

activates a lateral horizontal support. Only three of thirty repetitions per step
are modelled to reduce the computation expense; the applied load is plotted
in Figure 4.3.9.
Force-drift comparisons between experimental test and the numerical model
appear in Figure 4.3.10. Crack patterns after the third and last cycles are also
compared in Figures 4.3.11 and 4.3.12. The former reveals a slight capacity
underestimation on the positive side of the drift but good alignment on the
negative. Similarly, the energy dissipation matches experimentally on the
negative side but is moderately overestimated on the positive. After cycle 3,
the model's shear cracks are more prominent than those in wall Comp 48;
indeed, the walls showed Ψ=1.7 and Ψ=1.9 while the model shows 1.8. And,
the final damage patterns are reasonably aligned, although the model's shear
cracks are steeper. In terms of Ψ, at the end of the tests, the walls shows 2.6
and 2.3 while the model reaches 2.2, reasonably close.
At first glance, the comparison of crack patterns may appear to yield
inadequate results. Two aspects must be noted: First, in the experiments, only
cracks with a width higher than 0.1mm are presented, while in the FEM, cracks
from a width of 0 mm, indicating a non-zero cracking strain, can be retrieved. In
Figure 4.3.11, the ‘missing’ body cracks in Comp47 might have been there but
couldn’t be reliably detected. Secondly, the models show both top and bottom
rocking cracks. In the experiments, the bottom rocking crack couldn’t be fully
captured because it was just at the edge of the surveyed area. Measurements
with LVDTs, placed at the back of the wall, confirm that such a rocking crack
was also present. Hence, the bottom left rocking crack identified by the FE
models is correct.
The models fall short in determining the orientation of the cracks. They
correctly identify cracks in the body of the walls; but several parallel cracks, at a
steeper angle than the experimentally-observed, are depicted. This is partly
related to the mesh directional bias and a general deficiency of the EMM in
capturing diagonal cracks as opposed to the horizontal (rocking) crack which
are well represented. Moreover, the EMM yields more distributed crack
patterns instead of localised (Schreppers et.al). Sousamli (2024) has recently
tackled some of these issues.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

135

Chapter 4

Figure 4.3.9. Simplified loading protocol for the model consisting of only 3 cycles per
step.

Figure 4.3.10. Comparison of the force-displacement curve between the model and one
of the experiments.

136

Chapter 4

a. Exp. Comp47 (0.41‰)

b. Exp. Comp48 (0.41‰)
d. FE Model - Strain tensor

c. FE Model (Ecw1)

Figure 4.3.11. Comp. of experiments against the calibrated model for a drift of 0.41‰.

a. Exp. Comp47 (0.68 ‰)

b. Exp. Comp48 (0.68‰)

d. Strain tensor

c. FE Model (Ecw1)

Figure 4.3.12. Experiments against the calibrated model for a drift of 0.68‰.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

137

4.3.7. Conclusions from the Calibration Process

Therefore, the EMM-based FE model provided a strong starting point. It had to
be validated for crack initiation and propagation, which had not been the focus
of earlier studies. Additionally, relevant experimental boundaries had to be
incorporated in the model, and material parameters had to be extracted from
key material characterisation tests. Some other parameters had to be
calibrated on the basis of the spandrel and wall tests.
Different tests provided distinct parameters. The choice for the head joint
strength option was better defined from the walls without opening which
included much more shear behaviour (Mode II). In contrast, the sensitivity of
the tensile strength, was more influential in the walls with a window opening,
where Mode I behaviour played a stronger role.
The unloading schemes in the EMM were particularly useful to replicate the
different Mode I and Mode II cracking that occurs in masonry. Improvements
can be made to reproduce diagonal cracks and repetitive degradation.
Three parameters had the largest influence: the tensile strength, the fracture
energy in tension and the Young’s modulus. Coincidentally, these parameters
also have a large variability in experiments. Bond-wrench tests on the
replicated masonry samples revealed a deviation of 30% from the mean of the
tensile strength. This high variability is likely to be a good representation of the
variability in the field between different types of masonry. Fired-clay brick
masonry is diverse: the clay and sand composition, firing time and
temperature, mould material and shape, all lead to bricks with various
properties. Similarly, mortar recipes, lime- or cement-based, curing conditions
and masoning practices, will ultimately result in varying mortar, bond, and
masonry. While crack patterns were affected by these parameters, the measure
of damage in terms of Ψ, which consolidates damage into a single number,

Chapter 4

The calibration of a wall model that sufficiently represented the experiments
was not undergone blindly. A strategy had already been defined based on
earlier studies. That a finite-element-method model, with the then recently
developed Engineering Masonry Model as constitutive model of the
continuum, could be a strong contestant, was already apparent. To the left,
other strategies, that can represent crack patterns, are also limited. A micromodel was considered but was foreseen to be expensive. A discrete or distinctelement-method model could have also been successful (Malomo et.al 2018),
but work would have had to be invested in an adequate interface model that
could capture the behaviour of masonry joints, which was already included in
the EMM (Schreppers et.al, 2016).

138

Chapter 4

was less sensitive. It follows that damage in general fired-clay brick masonry
will be well represented.
A strong point of improvement would lay in the use of probabilistic models.
These would output a probable failure mechanism and a band for the forcedisplacement curve. The probabilistic distributions could be implemented both
at the model level, as is done later in Chapter 5 for the extrapolation models,
but also at the element level, replicating the fact that materials, especially
those like masonry, are never homogenous (Evangeliou, 2016; Roy, 2019). This
probabilistic approach would go in hand with additional experimental results;
these can also be viewed probabilistically. A larger number of experiments
would also yield some insight into the probable failure mechanisms, as the
more complex walls do not behave identically. For example, even at the small
scale, bond-wrench tests may fail at the mortar-brick interface, in the mortar, or
rarely, with delamination at the brick. Probabilistic numerical models could be
calibrated such that the ratio of the varying types of failures is reproduced. In
this case, various mechanisms and limit states would be predicted by models
and specific ones would be more or less likely.
Additional improvements could be further linked to experimental results. DIC
has captured displacements over the surface of the wall. The displacement
field could be contrasted to that of the numerical models. A comparison could
then be made on an element-by-element basis where the deformation of each
finite element is linked to the equivalent element on the DIC data. This could
also serve to determine the variability in material properties throughout the
wall (Sangirardi et.al, Judd et.al, 2023).
Calibrating models is not only about defining a modelling strategy that works.
The ultimate goal is to have models that can be used to analyse situations that
were not, or could not be, tested experimentally; these are extrapolations.
Simultaneously, the first two sections of this chapter have delved into hazards
and their actions on structures; the effect of some of these actions can then be
explored with the calibrated models. This is performed in the next section.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

139

4.4. Modelling Damage: Shrinkage, Settlements, and
Vibrations
Sections 4.1 and 4.2 presented an overview of hazards and multi-hazards. Yet,
Dutch buildings are seldom subjected to landslides, for instance, due to the flat
nature of the country’s geography. Instead, from the effects explored in these
earlier sections, three phenomena are most relevant to Dutch buildings:
temperature differences and material shrinkage leading to restrained
deformations, soil settlements resulting in imposed deformations, and
vibrations, as a result from earthquakes, leading to in-plane deformations and
damage. These can appear on buildings as a multi-hazard and are the focus of
this study.
In this section, an overview of modelling strategies to assess these effects is
presented. The models of a masonry wall with an opening, calibrated in
Section 4.3, are utilised. These serve as examples.

Modelling restrained deformations is straightforward. Analytically, the expected
stress is proportional to the Youngs Modulus of the material. For uniform axial
loads, the stress is d/L·E or simply Ε·ε. This assumes a perfect constraint which
is rarely the case. Moreover, walls are seldom uniformly restrained. Typically,
the foundation and the floor, if rigid in comparison to the wall, provide a
limited amount of restrain. This can also be solved analytically, but only for a
linear-elastic situation. If damage needs to be modelled, a FEM model is a
good approach.
Figure 4.4.1 displays a masonry wall subjected to internal shrinkage. A strain of
3·10-3 is a common amount of shrinkage for a brick wall with a general
cementitious mortar. In this model, the bottom of the wall is fully constrained in
the horizontal direction - mimicking the presence of a stiff foundation. The
material properties are derived from the calibrated models including smeared
cracking in the tensile failure with softening under the EMM. Many factors can
influence the intensity of cracking observed in the model. Besides the material
properties, boundaries are key. While a fully fixed boundary will lead to higher
damage, a partially restrained support will admit some displacement and thus
allow for some release in stress.
The figure also includes the stress trajectories on the wall at the load step right
before the first element is cracked. For every element a perpendicular set of
vectors is drawn; these are rotated according to the principal stress direction in
each. At the locations where cracks are about to occur, tensile stress gathers

Chapter 4

4.4.1. Modelling Restrained Deformations: Shrinkage

140

Chapter 4

perpendicular to the potential crack. Three of the window corners develop
stress concentrations. However, only the right bottom corner shows later a
prominent crack. As this corner cracked, stress re-distributed in the wall.

Figure 4.4.1. FEM model of a masonry wall subjected to shrinkage. Left, bottom edge
fully constrained. And right, top edge also restrained by a floor. Top, tensile stress
trajectories right before cracking for the left case.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

141

In the example on the right of Figure 4.4.1, the upper floor is also viewed as a
constraint; therefore, additional cracking is expected. The opening for a
window, significantly influences the cracking picture. Moreover, the connection
with the boundaries is important: in the examples, a horizontal restraint is
enforced, but if crack opening between foundation and wall are possible, the
shear transfer may de diminished resulting in delamination but less cracking in
the wall. Beyond these examples, modelling of shrinkage is a study in its own;
see Rots, Van Der Pluijm, & Vermeltfoort (1997) or de Vent (2011).

The type of imposed deformation will also determine the type of modelling
approach. A timber floor expanding due to changes in moisture will push in the
out-of-plane of a wall. Such a situation can be modelled by a shell representing
the wall supported on three sides and subjected to point loads at the positions
of the floor joints. This is illustrated in Figure 4.4.2, left. Here, the plane-stress
elements of the calibrated model are replaced by shell elements, which can be
loaded perpendicular to their plane. At the top edge of the wall, point loads,
distributed every 60 cm, are applied. These represent the contact points with
potential floor joists. This results in vertical cracks, especially a the top edge of
the window.
Another example is that of settlements. The main load-bearing wall of a simple
house may settle uniformly. Because this wall is connected to its transversal
walls, they experience a vertical displacement at their extremes. To support this
vertical displacement, the bottom edge of the wall is supported by springs (an
interface) representing the stiffness of the supporting soil. This is modelled on
the right of Figure 4.4.2. Here, the left edge of the wall displaces downwards.
This leads to vertical cracks at the corners of the window.
Alternatively, a loss of support of the transversal wall can be modelled. This
leads to a similar situation. Here, the boundary nodes of the interface at the
bottom edge is subjected to the imposed displacement with an asymmetric
hogging shape. This shape could be the result of a similar settlement cause.
The result is displayed in Figure 4.4.3. The ‘knick’ point of the hogging shape,
located towards the centre of the wall, leads to a sightly different crack pattern.
For modelling settlements, modelling approaches can become complex. The
soil can be included and even the settlement driver within the soil can be
modelled. These are not the prime focus of this work but are explored in [6, 9,
22].

Chapter 4

4.4.2. Modelling Imposed Deformations: Settlements

142

Chapter 4

Figure 4.4.2. FEM model of a masonry wall subjected to OOP due to point imposed
displacements due to the floor joists. Right, settlement of the façade due to an imposed
vertical displacement on the left edge due to settlement of its transversal wall. Top,
stress trajectories for the settlement case, one load step before the first element cracks.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

143

Figure 4.4.3. Model of a façade subjected to an applied settlement shape in the form of
asymmetric hogging, with the left or right edges settling.

Earthquake actions can be modelled in several ways. Linear elastic approaches,
like an equivalent base shear force (static) or the superposition of the structural
modal modes and a spectral analysis (dynamic), can offer good results but
cannot be used to determine crack-based damage - only the very initiation of
cracking when the tensile strength is exceeded.
Pushover against NLTHA
Two non-linear approaches are common, a pushover curve compared against
the acceleration and displacement demand of the earthquake record (static) or
a non-linear time history analysis (dynamic). Both approaches can be used to
estimate damage on a masonry structure. However, the pushover analysis
considers a quasi-static force-displacement curve. As the horizontal drift of the
structure increases, cracks appear and propagate. Nonetheless, an earthquake
is typically a cyclic event, where the drift reverses several times. If the number
of effective cycles is considerable, then the pushover analysis will produce a
different damage pattern than the NLTHA.
The pushover method has several advantages. First, the comparison against
the demand diagram can include several records simultaneously or even
idealised spectra from building codes. NLTH analyses require several records to
produce the same observations but, in the process, can provide accurate
quantifications of the damage variability due to the varying records. Secondly,
pushover analyses are significantly cheaper computationally. Thirdly, pushover
curves can be compared to the envelope of cyclic experimental tests or
monotonic tests; depending on this, a model can be indirectly calibrated for
cyclic actions.

Chapter 4

4.4.3. Dynamic, Non-Linear Time History Analysis: Vibrations

144

Chapter 4

Nonetheless, pushover strategies also have some limitations: First, the seismic
loading is simplified into a static, incrementally increasing load. This approach
cannot capture the dynamic nature of real seismic events, which is a critical
limitation compared to NLTHA that models seismic loading as it occurs in time.
Second, they typically focus on the first mode of vibration and assume a
predetermined distribution of lateral forces, which may not accurately
represent the actual behaviour of the structure under multi-dimensional seismic
excitation. NLTHA, on the other hand, can account for higher modes and their
effects.
Third, since pushover analyses are a static procedure, they inherently assume
that dynamic effects (like inertia and damping) are not significant, which is not
always the case in real seismic events. NLTHA include these dynamic effects.
Moreover, pushover methods cannot capture time-dependent phenomena
such as the sequence of cracking, yielding, or changes in dynamic properties
during an earthquake. NLTHA can account for these effects as it simulates the
structural response over time. Similarly, the pushover analysis might not
accurately estimate the energy dissipation capacity of a structure during a real
earthquake. NLTHA provides a more realistic assessment of how a structure will
perform, including its capacity to dissipate energy.
Finally, NLTHA can more effectively incorporate soil-structure interaction
effects, which are significant in certain cases.
A sequentially-linear pushover analysis (SLPA) combined in each step with an
ADRS could address some of these limitations. The issue of crack snap through,
when the brittle formation of a crack unloads the rest of the model, can also be
effectively and robustly modelled using SLA; see Pari et al. (2017).
but this is a topic for future study, see also Appendix A.4. For these reasons,
NLTHA are employed in the rest of this work to analyse seismic vibrations.
A comparison between the crack pattern observed from a pushover analysis
against a NLTHA is performed in Figure 4.4.4 for the earthquake of Zeerijp.
This record (see later Figure 5.2.2) has only a few effective cycles. The drift
used for the pushover analysis follows from the displacement demand of the
record for the first natural period of the structure. For the NLTHA, the
maximum crack width is displayed. One can observe some differences between
the crack patterns. Many studies focus exclusively in comparing these two
approaches (Giusto et.al 2024).

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

145

Chapter 4

Figure 4.4.4. Left, the crack pattern from a pushover analysis of the Zeerijp near record,
and right, the same earthquake evaluated with a NLTHA.

146

Chapter 4

4.4.4. Modelling Multi-hazards
When modelling the effects of a multi-hazard, their respective actions need to
be considered. When the actions of the hazards are identical, modelling is
straightforward; for example, shrinkage of a wall followed by temperature
changes are both hazards that lead to restrained deformations at the same
location and can be modelled by enforcing a strain field on the wall or applying
a displacement to the supports. Similarly, vibrations from traffic in combination
with vibrations from seismic events can be analysed as a single continuous
action.
A more thoughtful strategy is needed when the actions from the primary and
secondary hazards are different. For example, imposed displacements followed
by vibrations, as could be the case for soil subsidence and earthquakes,
represent a multi-hazard with different actions. Similarly, overloading followed
by restrained deformations, as could be the case of a snowstorm and extreme
cold temperatures. In this theoretical example, the snow on a roof can cause
overloading and provides additional insulation that creates a difference in
temperature between structural components.
For multi-hazards with varying actions, the model must be able to
accommodate both types of actions in a way that the damage from both can
be calculated. Moreover, the damage of the primary hazard will influence the
aggravation of damage from the secondary hazard. A general approach is
described extensively in [2], which also includes a case study with an
earthquake - flood multi-hazard where a flood (or tsunami) follows an
earthquake event. In this case, the structures are weakened by the earthquake
accelerations and are more vulnerable to the lateral actions exerted by the
flood.
In this work, a multi-hazard consisting of settlement deformations followed by
earthquake vibrations is explored. These models are generated in more detail
in Chapter 5, but are briefly described next for clarity:
First, a boundary interface is used underneath the wall geometry to apply a
settlement shape. The imposed displacement is increased until a pre-defined
value of damage (Ψ=1 for example) is achieved. Then, in a second phase of the
analysis, the interface is locked by increasing its shear stiffness. In this way, an
acceleration time history can be applied at the boundary end of the spring and
its horizontal displacements are transferred to the wall.

Damaging Hazards and Modelling

147

4.5. Conclusions: Modelling and Calibration
This chapter has explored the multifaceted nature of hazards, both natural and
anthropogenic, and their specific actions on buildings, with a particular focus
on the Dutch context. Through detailed finite-element-method (FEM) model
calibrations, informed by experiments and collaborative efforts, the
groundwork for understanding and quantifying the impact of various
(multi-)hazard scenarios on structures is laid. The calibrated models have not
only allowed to replicate the behaviour observed in experimental settings but
have also served as a tool for simulating the effects of different hazard actions
on buildings.

The chosen EMM-based FE model needed validation for crack initiation and
propagation, incorporating experimental boundaries and extracting material
parameters from (companion) tests. The impact of parameters such as tensile
strength, fracture energy, and Young’s modulus was significant, given their
variability and influence on crack behaviour.
Improvements could consider probabilistic models or might integrate more
experimental data. For instance, Digital Image Correlation (DIC) has helped
align model predictions with observed displacements, providing insights into
material variability. The ultimate goal is to extend these models to analyse
untested scenarios, leveraging calibrated models to assess hazards and
structural responses.
Hazards such as shrinkage and soil movements have been investigated with the
calibrated models. The deformation of the wall and the resulting crack patterns
were reviewed. Most cracks appeared around window openings, similarly as in
the experiments. The cracks developed perpendicular to the tensile stresses on
the finite elements. Different hazards also led to distinct crack patterns.
However, some cracks were recurrent even between differing hazard actions.

Chapter 4

The calibration process for a wall model was guided by previous studies, using
the Engineering Masonry Model (EMM) in a finite-element-method (FEM) for its
ability to simulate crack patterns and include masonry loading/unloading
behaviour.

149

Chapter 5
Fragility
This chapter describes the final step to quantify the probability of light damage
or its aggravation. Earlier chapters have looked into how to measure crackbased light damage, both conceptually and in experiments. Its reproduction in
models has also been investigated so that extrapolations to new situations
could be made. On the basis of these new situations, the influence of variations
in building context, which lead to a varying damage response, is observed.
How to obtain a probability of damage, or fragility from these results is
presented next.

Chapter 5

This section is loosely based on several works including [7, 15, 23, 24, 27]; see
List of Publications.

150

Chapter 5

Chapter 5 : Table of Contents
5.1. Introduction

150

5.2. Extrapolation to Non-Linear Dynamic Analyses
152
5.2.1. Background on Experiments and Calibration ...................................152
5.2.2. Setup of Extrapolation Models (Based on Field Cases) ....................153
5.2.3. Results from Extrapolation Models ...................................................161
5.3. Regression of Damage Function from FEM Results
167
5.3.1. Reasoned Regression Model Considering Ψ0..................................167
5.3.2. Model Uncertainty ............................................................................173
5.3.3. Surrogate Model with Machine Learning .........................................175
5.4. Fragility Curves for Seismic Vibrations
178
5.4.1. Probabilistic distributions and Parameters........................................178
5.4.2. Results of Monte Carlo Simulation ...................................................180
5.4.3. Comparisons to other Studies ..........................................................184
5.4.4. Fragility Maps ...................................................................................187
5.5. Fragility Curves for Settlements from Soil Curvatures
191
5.5.1. Overview of Semi-Coupled Models of Masonry Façades.................191
5.5.2. Fragility Curves for Soil Angular Distortion: β vs. Ψ .........................198
5.6. Conclusions: Probability of Damage and Aggravation

206

5.1. Introduction
The outcome of a numerical model is a deterministic value. This means it is
only applicable to a single case. It is unlikely that the case being reproduced
will match the model exactly. For this reason, usually a series of models is
analysed to obtain a lower and a higher boundary of what is to be expected,
varying some of the most sensitive model properties. This is applicable to
reproducing experiments where most of the model parameters are reasonably
known via measurements and companion tests. For reproducing real cases, a
deterministic outcome is naive; in these cases, one should always consider a
probabilistic result consisting of an expected value and its uncertainty.
The goal of this work highlights the need to establish the probability of
damage, recognising that the behaviour of masonry buildings will be different
in many cases. The probability will depend on the expected variations of all the
parameters that might affect damage development such as the strength of the
material, the shape and geometry of a building, the intensity of the loads, etc.
One could analyse a model for each of the possible variations. At some point

Fragility

151

however, the number of permutations is so large, that evaluating expensive
numerical models becomes unfeasible.
The solution is a hybrid strategy demonstrated in this chapter. First, sufficient
numerical models are evaluated to explore the relationship between the
hazard, damage and other influential parameters. These relationships are then
expressed via a surrogate model: a mathematical formulation that captures the
observed relations. Lastly, the surrogate model is used to simulate a larger
number of variations thus quantifying the probability of damage.

The second way in which the models are used to extrapolate is presented in
Section 5.5. Here, quasi-static soil movements or deformations leading to
settlements are briefly explored. This set of models is used to present a second
example of a surrogate function, in this case with a trained neural network, a
type of machine learning model well suited for this purpose. The model is then
used for a similar MonteCarlo simulation to determine the fragility of masonry
buildings against increasing soil curvature or a settlement hazard.

Chapter 5

The calibrated finite-element-method models of chapter 4 are used to
investigate two new situations, or extrapolations. In Section 5.2, these
extrapolations study the effect of dynamic soil movements (seismic vibrations).
Section 5.3 then regresses a relationship between damage and the parameters
varied in the models. Next, Section 5.4 conducts a MonteCarlo simulation
using probabilistic distributions for the parameters and the intensity of the
seismic vibrations. These lead to the probability of damage expressed at
increasing seismic intensity, i.e. a set of fragility curves.

152

Chapter 5

5.2. Extrapolation to Non-Linear Dynamic Analyses
5.2.1. Background on Experiments and Calibration
The experiments have been presented in Chapter 3 and the calibration of FEM
models has been treated in Section 4.3. A brief summary of their key aspects is
drafted here for clarity. The experiments involved testing five nominally
identical, single-wythe walls of fired-clay brick masonry, each 3.1 meters wide
and 2.7 meters tall, with an asymmetrically placed window opening. These
walls were tested quasi-statically in-plane by enforcing controlled displacement
at the top, mimicking a 'cantilever' (flexural) configuration. The walls were preloaded vertically to produce an average stress of 0.12 MPa, resembling
moderate vertical loads. Two additional walls, identical in material but without
a window opening, were tested at a higher vertical overburden of 0.46 MPa in
a 'double-clamped' (shear) configuration. Another set of two walls with window
openings and pre-damaged crack interfaces was also tested under similar
conditions.
The experiments imposed in-plane drifts to the walls of up to 0.1%, with some
cracks reaching a width of up to 2 mm. Cracks propagated differently in the
flexural walls (mostly horizontal and stair-case-diagonal from the window
corners) compared to the shear walls (mostly steeper diagonal cracks starting
from the wall centre). Additionally, ten spandrel-type wallets were tested in a
four-point bending setup, showing toothed, vertical, crack patterns.
The described experiments, along with standard masonry characterisation
tests, informed the development of a modelling strategy using the finite
element method (FEM) with DIANA-FEA. This strategy aimed to replicate the
specimens' behaviour in terms of stiffness, strength, hysteresis, and crack
patterns. The macro approach for masonry was employed, using twodimensional, plane-stress, quadrilateral, 8-node, quadratic elements (CQ16M)
with a mesh size of 50 mm. A non-linear material model (Engineering Masonry
Model - EMM) was selected, accounting for different inelastic and elastic
properties in directions perpendicular and aligned with the bed-joints.
A single set of parameters was used for all calibration models, reflecting the
material characteristics of the masonry that were uniform for the laboratory
tests. These models included both physical and geometrical non-linearities and
were solved using a quasi-Newton incremental-iterative approach. An overview
of the calibration models is presented, juxtaposing experimental and modelled
displacement fields, crack patterns, and force-displacement curves, illustrating
the various calibration campaigns and their outcomes.

Fragility

153

5.2.2. Setup of Extrapolation Models (Based on Field Cases)
The models that were calibrated and validated against the laboratory tests are
subsequently extended into the nonlinear time-history domain so as to assess
stress, and 8-node quadratic elements with a 3x3 Gaussian integration scheme. The elements were
the
effect of seismic vibrations and replace the laboratory boundaries with the
assigned the Engineering Masonry Model for DIANA FEA, an orthotropic non-linear material
constraints
to a masonry
a real
structure;
this light,
these
model which provided
includes different
properties wall
for thebytwo
directions
for bothinelastic
and inelastic
behavior:
tensile
cracking
with
softening
and
secant
nonlinear
unloading/reloading
behavior,
models become extrapolations from the validated laboratory scenario to real
Coulomb friction with cohesion softening and elastic unloading/reloading, and compression
field
cases
whilehorizontal
maintaining
the geometry
of the
wall.
The adaptations
crushing
(in both
and vertical
directions) with
mixed
secant/elastic
unloading and
and
variations
are presented
in the
reloading (Schreppers
et al. 2017,
Rotsfollowing
et al. 2016).two
Thissubsections:
material model, purposely developed to
depict the inelastic behavior of masonry, is key when assessing the accumulation of damage.
a.
Geometry A

Geometry B

b.

c.

a) top weight and dynamic mass, b) lateral constraints, and c) soil-structure interaction.
The models include an interface at their base to simulate the local soil-structure interaction. The
interface is provided with springs and dampers which simulate the presence of the soil around the
Model
Adaptations
foundation
of the structure following the methodology proposed by Gazetas (1991), adapted from
NEHRP
(2012) and further
explored
in Longo
et al. are
(2021).
The boundary
interface
does
notlisted
allow
The
adaptations
applied
to the
models
shown
in Figure
1 and
are
tension so that applying a settlement shape does not pull on the masonry and allows it to deform
below:
freely instead. The masonry elements are assigned 2% of Rayleigh damping based on the first two
Additionally,
a line mass
of 10,000 kg at the of
top,0.12
represents
of floors
•modes.
Overburden:
a vertical
pre-compression
MPatheis dynamic
appliedeffect
at the
top
and transversal walls experienced by the walls if they were part of a structure; similarly, an
edge
after
the
self-weight
gravity
load.
This
stress
corresponds
to
the
weight
overburden of 0.12 MPa is applied as a gravity load.
The
of transversal
walls
was also
included
in the
manner
in the previous study
of effect
one concrete
floor
or two
timber
storeys
(a same
storey
and aasroof).
focused on settlement deformations (Korswagen et al. 2019b), namely with linear-elastic beam
•elements
Top boundary:
no steel
used
top ofthethe
wall of
as ainflange
the
placed vertically
on thebeam
sides ofis the
wallsatandthe
simulating
stiffness
connected
via
the
corners
to
the
modelled
walls,
typical
for
Dutch
masonry
buildings
before
1970.
laboratory; instead, a stiffness-free line-mass element is incorporated to
The models included three phases: first, the gravity load was evaluated for which no cracking
mimic
theobserved.
dynamic
effect aofsettlement
a floor. deformation
The mass was
is set
at 10underneath
ton to simulate
the
strains
were
Secondly,
applied
the boundary
presence
ofled
a fictitious
rigidinfloor,
an depending
upper masonry
wall, an
upper
floor
and
interface
which
to small cracks
the walls
on the intensity
of the
applied
profile,
forasome
no pre-damage
see nextdoesn’t
section. Thirdly,
sliding
at the interface
roof.walls
While
the wall was
withgenerated;
an opening
carry the
vertical
weightwas
of
locked, the displacement field of the wall was cleared but cracking strains were retained, and a
these components,
massindoes
the horizontal
in-plane
behaviour
time-history
analysis was their
performed
whichaffect
the acceleration
time series
of four
distinct
earthquake
records
evaluated
different
models).
The settlement
shapecondition.
and earthquake
of the walls;
as was
such,
the line(inmass
does
not influence
the static
records
are detailed
in Figure
2. To
adequately
record-to-record
variability
of the
The mass
is also
used to
calibrate
therepresent
naturalthe
periods
of the walls
to match
earthquake vibrations, four records from two events were selected. By employing recording
those ofnear
low-rise
which
the walls
extracted.
The
registered
and farmasonry
from the buildings
epicenters, from
with both
horizontal
and are
vertical
components,

flexible wall has a fundamental natural frequency of about 9Hz and the stiff
wall of about 13Hz; depending on material, soil and initial masonry condition,
2

Chapter 5

Figure5.2.1.
1. TwoSchematisation
geometries of the of
FEM
model.
a) Mass
roof, b) effect ofoflateral
walls,
c) local
Figure
the
model
withfrom
the the
representation
some
its features:
soil-structure interaction.

154

Chapter 5

these periods can vary by up to ±2Hz. This is deemed an adequate
representation in terms of natural periods for masonry buildings.
• Rayleigh damping: a 2% damping based on the first two modes, as judged
by order of participating mass, is included in the model.
• Lateral boundaries: two vertical, linear-elastic beam elements, with a fictitious
cross-section of one brick, are added to the lateral edges to simulate the
constraints of transversal walls. These elements have an elastic modulus
equal to 1800 MPa and a Poisson's ratio of 0.16. The density is set to account
for the out-of-plane dynamic effect of a wall of 3 m in length along the
transversal direction.
• Soil-structure interaction: the bottom steel beam used during the calibration
phase is replaced with a combination of springs and dashpots. These are
placed underneath the wall in order to simulate the effect of the soil on the
structure. Stiffness and damping are provided by two separate interface
elements:
1) A non linear 2D line boundary interface (CL6TM-NL), which accounts for
the stiffness and for the soil’s behaviour, is characterised with a Coulomb
friction law. The cohesion is set to 0.1 MPa while the friction and dilatancy
angles to 0.61 rad. Additionally, a no-tension criterion is enforced for the
springs representing the fact that no tension can develop between soil and
foundation.
2) A similar, yet linear-elastic interface (CL6TM-LE), which includes the
damping coefficients and offers no stiffness, is also included.
The values of stiffness and damping are varied for two types of soil profiles
(and two types of façades) as presented in Table 2. A stiff soil, with higher
stiffness and better damping, is contrasted to a poor or soft soil. The
methodology employed to determine these coefficients is adapted from
NEHRP and described extensively in [5], while the representative soil profiles
were obtained from Deltares using insight discussed by Kruiver et al. (2017).
• Input motion: the load introduced as an in-plane, quasi-static displacement at
the top of the wall in the experiment is replaced by horizontal and vertical
accelerations applied at the base of the wall. This extrapolation is two fold:
first, the accelerations become inertia loads, focused at the top (because of
the mass) but also distributed throughout the wall; this modifies the validated
behaviour slightly. Second, the appearance of cracks could be different when
tested dynamically, however, the damage behaviour with dynamic tests has
not yet been studied; hence, this becomes a reservation in the present study.
Nevertheless, the assumption of transitory or transient damage as the
residual damage is conservative (see Section 2.4).

Fragility

155

The accelerations applied to the models are derived from four distinct seismic
records. Two of these records are from the Zeerijp earthquake captured at the
Garsthuizen and Appingedam stations; see Table 1. The other two records are
from the Westerwijtwerd earthquake from stations: Stedum and Hoeksmeer.
These motions are illustrated in Figure 2 and categorised as 'near' or 'far'
based on the station's proximity to the epicentre, with the motion amplitudes
normalised to a consistent scale. The expansion in the network of geophones
and accelerometers has allowed capturing several records from multiple
events; earlier records, like those of the event of Huizinge 2012, are not as
complete.

Event
Zeerijp
8 January 2018
Westerwijtwerd
22 May 2019

Magnitude

3.4

Station

Distance

MaxRot
Horz. PGV

Vertical
PGV

Garsthuizen

2.5 km

31.3 mm/s

6.0 mm/s

Appingedam

7.5 km

2.4 mm/s

0.8 mm/s

Stedum

3.2 km

5.4 mm/s

2.5 mm/s

Hoeksmeer

9.7 km

1.7 mm/s

0.7 mm/s

This classification reflects not only the distance from the epicentre but also
similarities in the seismic properties across different records. For instance, the
horizontal seismic motions recorded at closer locations ('near') are
characterised by arriving earlier and having fewer effective cycles compared to
the 'far' records, which show a greater number of cycles with similar
amplitudes. This observation is further supported by Fast-Fourier Transform
analyses, indicating that the 'far' records are predominantly composed of lower
frequency vibrations, ranging from 2 to 4 Hertz, particularly in their horizontal
components. Conversely, the frequency content of the vertical components is
more consistent across all records. Note that the designations of “near” and
“far” for these shallow, induced earthquakes differ from those used for tectonic
earthquakes where distances are much larger.
The Arias intensity plots reveal additional distinctions: the energy in the 'near'
records is concentrated within a smaller portion of the timeline, whereas in the
'far' records, the energy distribution spans a more extended period. This
difference in energy distribution is also evident in the PGV amplitudes; the
vertical components of the 'far' records show about a third of the PGV of their
horizontal counterparts, while the 'near' records' vertical components exhibit
about a fifth.

Chapter 5

Table 5.2.1. Overview of the four earthquake records employed. For the horizontal Peak
Ground Velocity, the maximum rotated component is shown (recorded).

156

Chapter 5

Spectral amplification analyses show that, although the horizontal components
of both 'near' and 'far' records achieve similar levels of amplification, the 'far'
records demonstrate activity over a longer range of structural periods. In
contrast, the vertical components, particularly in the 'far' records, exhibit higher
dynamic amplification but are confined to shorter periods, close to 0.1
seconds. These variations are present when comparing both earthquake types,
provided they are scaled to the same peak ground velocity value. The
variability in these records arises not only from their different epicentral
distances but also from diverse site conditions such as local soil characteristics,
soil composition between the epicentre and the station, and the orientation of
the fault relative to the station, etc.

Normalized Amplitude

Despite the typical practice in structural analysis of utilising a broader spectrum
of records (usually seven or more), the computational demands of NLTHAs and
their associated complexities in this study necessitated limiting the selection to
these four records. This approach allows for a balanced consideration of
'record to record' variability within the constraints of available computational
resources.
Shape of Settlement Profile
0

-0.5

-1
0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

Horizontal Coordinate in mm

Figure 5.2.3. Normalised profile of the settlement displacement applied to the base of
extrapolation models with pre-damage.
Table 5.2.3. Parameters for variations performed in the models.
Binary

Variations

Continuous

Variations

Façade
geometry

Flexible (A) or Stiff
(B)

Earthquake PGV

2 to 128 mm/s

Soil type

Sand (A) or Peat (B)

Number of earthquakes

1 to 8

Earthquake
& type
event

Near (N) or Far (F)

Material strength
(relative)
Initial damage (Ψ0)

0.5 to 1.5

Zeerijp (Z) or
Westerwijtwerd (W)

0 to 1.5

Fragility

157
Velocity - Horizontal

Normalised Vel.

1
Near
Far

Zeerijp
Westerwijtwerd

Time in s

0

5

Norm. to Hor. Vel.

0.5 (Vert. vel. shown magnified by 2)

Zeerijp
Westerwijtwerd

Time in s
5

10

15

Arias Intensity - Horizontal

Norm. Intensity

FFT - Horizontal

5

10

15

0

FFT - Vertical

5

10

15

Arias Intensity - Vertical

0

5

10

Norm. S a

Frequency in Hz

Norm. S a

0

Spectral Acceleration - Horizontal

5

10

15

Time in s

Westerwd.
Zeerijp
Near
Far

10-2

10-2

15

10-1

100

10-1

100

Spectral Acceleration - Vertical
Westerwd.
Zeerijp
Near
Far

Period in s (logarithmic scale)

Figure 5.2.2. Comparison between records of the Zeerijp and Westerwijtwerd
earthquakes. For each event two time-series have been selected recorded at relatively
near and far stations; see Table 1. Records are normalised to the horizontal peak ground
velocity for comparison purposes.

Chapter 5

0

Norm. Intensity

Norm. Amplitude

15

Near
Far

0

Norm. Amplitude

10

Velocity - Vertical

158

Chapter 5

Table 5.2.2. Soil parameters and interface properties. *Average, due to dependency on
the properties of the structure. ** For flexible and rigid structures, respectively.
Material Properties

Stiff - Soil A

Soft - Soil B

Silty Sand

Peat

Density

ρ

1700

2000

kg/m3

Elastic Modulus

E

44.2

26.0

MPa

Elastic Shear Modulus

G

17.0

10.0

MPa

Poisson's Ratio

ν

0.3

0.3

-

Compression Wave Velocity

vc

187.1

132.3

m/s

Shear Wave Velocity

vs

100.0

70.7

m/s

Horizontal side stiffness*

kxsi

-

-

N/m

Horizontal side damping*

cxsi

-

-

N/m/s

Horizontal stiffness*

kxi

3.76E+08

1.04E+08

N/m3

Horizontal damping*

cxi

1.10E+05

4.31E+04

N/m/s

Vertical stiffness*

kzi

4.36E+08

1.21E+08

N/m3

Vertical damping*

czi

2.06E+08

8.07E+04

N/m/s

Vertical stiffness at corners*

kzei

5.66E+08

1.57E+08

N/m3

Vertical damping at
corners**

czei

4.50E+06

3.50E+03

8.50E+06

6.40E+03

N/m/s

Model Variations
In this manner, the light-damage impact of earthquake vibrations can be
evaluated on a single masonry wall. The complexity of a three-dimensional
structure and the effect of the soil are thus partially included in a model that
can be reliably assessed for a multitude of variations while observing the
initiation and propagation of damage in the form of cracks. In this context, the
variability of light damage is characterised through seven key parameters listed
in Table 5.2.3. The parameters are categorised into ‘binary or categorical
parameters’, those that only have two (binary) or four distinct possibilities and
for which no trend can thus be observed, and into ‘continuous parameters’,
which may assume any value within a given range. All these parameters are
discussed next:
• Firstly, two wall geometries are modelled, with and without a window
opening, to consider a more flexible wall with predominantly flexural
behaviour, and a more rigid wall with prevalent shear behaviour; these two

Fragility

159

typologies correspond to the two types of wall geometry tested
experimentally and represent the first binary parameter.
• Secondly, the soil can be varied; the two soil variations used in this study
have been discussed in Table 5.2.2.
• Thirdly, the record-to-record variability is provided by four earthquake
records; the type of earthquake motion is characterised by the distance to
the epicentre with ‘near’ and ‘far’ scenarios and belong to two earthquake
events; the difference in frequency content, number of effective cycles, and
relationship between horizontal and vertical motions for example, are
inherent to these records and serve to depict the variability in earthquake
motions.

• Fifthly, the quantity of earthquake events is also varied; applying the same
record for a second time leads to greater accumulated damage in the nonlinear model. Thereby, the effect of repeated events on masonry structures
can be quantified.
• Sixthly, the masonry material must be varied; three scenarios are considered
for the fired-clay brick masonry corresponding to a weak, standard, and
strong masonry. Their differences are gathered in Table 5.2.4 and are based
on an analysis of masonry characterisation tests (Jafari, 2020).
• Finally, the initial condition of the masonry wall is also varied; this requires
some discussion. The intensity of the (pre-)damage is measured using the Ψ
damage parameter such that the progression of damage can be
quantitatively observed; see Chapter 2. A virgin (Ψ0=0) and three predamaged initial conditions (Ψ0>0) are considered; the three scenarios where
the wall is already damaged when the earthquake motion is applied,
correspond to distinct intensities of differential settlement damage. A
settlement profile is enforced as a displacement of the fixed side of the nonlinear boundary interface; the normalised profile is shown in Figure 5.2.3 and
was fabricated based on the study of real-case deformations via the
measurement of masonry bed joint levelling. The amplitude of the profile is
adapted such that three intensities of pre-damage are achieved for the wall:

Chapter 5

• Fourthly, the variability in the intensity of the motion is considered by scaling
the PGV of the horizontal component of the records (and proportionally, the
vertical component) to eight different amplitudes: 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 96, and
128 mm/s. It’s important to note that in this context, the distance to the
epicentre is decoupled from the amplitude of the record. Moreover, this is
the first continuous parameter since the PGV can adopt any value within this
range.

160

Chapter 5

low (0.25<Ψ0<0.75), moderate (0.75<Ψ0<1.25), and high pre-damage
(1.25<Ψ0<1.75). It should be noted that sometimes, models of different
typology with the same pre-damage value may display a different failure
mechanism and, that these initial values are used in the context of DS1 and
so the terms ‘moderate’ or ‘high’ are relative to these values as pre-damage
to assess light damage.
Each analysis is divided into three phases: self-weight and gravity loads,
settlement (if present), and earthquake loading. All the models are investigated
with the same analysis procedure, keeping load steps, iterative method, norms,
and tolerances identical. For the settlement phase the load step changes
based on the different properties and the intensity of pre-damage required.
After the self-weight and settlement case, the non-linear analysis is continued
in a time-history setting with the dynamic load being applied to the deformed
model with time-steps of 2 ms. As with the calibration models, physical and
geometrical nonlinear effects are considered; yet, in addition, transient effects
are activated while considering the dynamic effects using a consistent mass
and damping matrix. The Newmark-Beta method (β=0.25, γ=0.50) is used as
time integration method for these non-linear time-history analyses. Moreover,
the Rayleigh damping is kept using the then current stiffness matrix.
Table 5.2.4. Variations in material properties; for unchanged properties, see Table 4.4.1.
Material Properties

Weak/Poor Standard Strong/Good

Elastic Modulus Perpendicular to BedJoints

2747

3571

5101

MPa

Elastic Modulus Parallel to Bed-Joints

1921

2497

3567

MPa

Elastic Shear Modulus

1154

1500

2143

MPa

Bed-Joint Tensile Strength

0.112

0.16

0.208

MPa

Minimum Head-Joint Tensile Strength

0.112

0.16

0.208

MPa

Tensile Fracture Energy

5.6

11.30

19.0

N/m

Cohesion

0.119

0.17

0.221

MPa

Shear Fracture Energy

102.5

209

353.0

N/m

Fragility

161

5.2.3. Results from Extrapolation Models
The permutation of the seven parameters to vary in the models results in more
than six thousand different scenarios; however, only 3840 cases were run by
neglecting cases where key, previously-run models indicated that no damage
was expected. For example, for the cases where the earthquake intensity of 4
and 8 mm/s did not lead to any damage (increase), the case of 2 mm/s was not
run. Similarly, when two repetitions and a PGV of 2 mm/s didn’t lead to a
damage (increase), the case for one repetition was spared.

First, the wall type or façade type revealed that the flexible wall (A) showed a
higher increment of damage (∆Ψ) in respect to façade B, consistently, at least
for the near-type earthquake records. An example is provided in Figure 5.a in
which two damage patterns of different façades are presented. The window
opening of façade A contributes to an easier initiation of cracks due to stress
concentration at the window corners. The lateral constraints and top mass
enhance the damage to the lateral side and above the window opening
respectively. Façade B presents minor shear cracking at the mid-left of the
model and some smeared cracking to the lateral side. Horizontal cracks at the
bottom are also visible. For the case represented in 5.a, when the two façades
are placed on soil A, having weak material, no pre-damage, and subjected to a
single, near Zeerijp event of 32 mm/s, façade A experiences 25% more
damage than façade B. In other words, for most of the cases, the wall with the
window appears more vulnerable to damage than the rigid wall. It should be
noted that these results display the maximum of crack strain in all Gauss points
that occurred over the entire NLTH analysis. This explains the rather wide zones
or ‘clouds’ of smeared cracks. At certain discrete times, the crack strain plots
show a more localised pattern as some Gauss points soften while others
unload. As an alternative, discrete crack/slip micro-models in predefined
interface elements were used to study these localisations [3]; yet, these more
detailed models are severely more computationally expensive and did not lead
to significantly better calibration results; hence, they were not considered for
this large number of analyses.

Chapter 5

Figure 5.2.4 presents a coloured overview of the results, where each model was
evaluated by automatically computing its damage value Ψ and its initial
damage Ψ0. Note the four quadrants delimited by dark lines which correspond
to the 2x2 permutations of the two binary variables (wall type, and soil) and
that each square is divided into four triangles for the two events of Zeerijp and
Westerwijtwerd (ZN, ZF, WN, WF). The effect of each variable is discussed next
and some examples from the pool of analyses are picked.

162

Chapter 5

Figure 5.2.4. Results in terms of ∆Ψ from the permutations with the extrapolation
models for fired-clay brick. There are 40x24 squares, each divided into 4 triangles. In
total, 3840 results are displayed. This type of graph is referred to as the ‘colour
diamonds’ table.

Secondly, the soil type: the softer soil (B) requires a higher settlement
amplitude to produce the same damage level obtained in a façade modelled

Fragility

163

For the earthquake type, near or far from the epicentre using the two records
of the Zeerijp event, Figure 5.c presents the effect on façade B on soil B with
standard material and moderate pre-damage. Both earthquake types are
scaled to a PGV of 32 mm/s and a single motion is run. The results show a
different crack propagation; while for the near-field motion the existing crack
pattern grows mainly in length with some additional parallel lateral cracks, the
far motion depicts mainly an increase in width without affecting much its
length. This behaviour is frequently seen in façade B when the far record often
produces higher damage. On the other hand, the flexible façade (A) appears
more sensitive to the near motion. This observation is likely related to the
different frequencies present in the two signals which interact in distinct
manners with the two types of walls.
Next, Figure 6.a. depicts the effect of different pre-damage situations on the
final damage condition at the end of one motion; only the cases subjected to
settlement are shown in the graph. The analyses concern façade A with
standard material on soil A and subjected to one near earthquake (ZN) of 16
mm/s. The pre-damage values (Ψ0) are about 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 respectively for
low, moderate and high pre-damage cases. As can be seen, increasing the
damage at the initial condition, produces higher final damage. The detected
values are 1.2, 1.4 and 1.6 Ψ with increasing level of pre-damage. The model
of the same category without initial settlement loading, generates a final
damage of 0.8 Ψ. It must be noted that, the increment of damage ΔΨ
diminishes when a higher pre-damage is adopted. In fact, considering the
initial state, the difference between final and initial damage (ΔΨ) is equal to
0.8, 0.7, 0.4, and 0.1, respectively for no, low, moderate and high pre-damage.
This observation can be generalised for many other cases.
Regarding the quantity or number of earthquake records, the cumulation of
damage gained from multiple earthquakes in a row is summarised in Figure
6.b. The presented façade B on soil A with weak material and no pre-damage

Chapter 5

with soil A. This is because, for the same enforced soil deformation, the more
flexible soil better accommodates the desired deformation of the structure,
while the stiffer soil leads to sharper curvatures and hence higher stresses and
damage in the walls. Figure 5.b shows the virgin, rigid wall with weak material
and subjected to a single, near earthquake (ZN) of 96 mm/s as PGV, analysed
with two different soils. A similar crack pattern is detected for the two models,
which depict diagonal shear cracking at the middle of the wall; see Figure
5.2.5. Cracks in models with soil A appear more concentrated and wider than
the smeared shear cracking of the one on the weaker soil B. In this case the
difference in damage at the end of the protocol reaches about 20%.

164

Chapter 5

is subjected to three different number (repetitions) of near-type earthquakes
(ZN), all with PGV of 16 mm/s; one, four and eight motions are applied. As
expected, a higher number of earthquakes leads to a higher value of final
damage. After each earthquake motion, the cracks increase in width and in
length. The increase is minor, about 2 to 5%, but consistent throughout the
entire table of results; lower PGVs are also associated with a smaller increment
rate.
Similarly, the variation in material presents a congruous observation: the
weaker masonry material leads to a more flexible model, but also to lower
values of resistance to tensile and shear failure, consequently, a larger
increment of damage can be observed when the material properties are weak.
An example of this trend is shown in Figure 6.c where the flexible façade A is
subjected to a 96 mm/s far-field earthquake (ZF). The model is placed on soil A
and has no pre-damage, and the results at the end of the motion of the three
different material configurations are shown in the figure. The façade with weak
material develops two cracks at the top window corners, together with damage
in the top spandrel. The two stronger material variations depict additional tiny
cracks located at the other window corners and a more distributed damage to
spandrel and lateral sides; nevertheless, the width of these cracks and their
length result in a final damage value lower than that of the case with the weak
material.
Finally, varying the intensity of the earthquake motion, where the intensity is
given by the scaled value of peak ground velocity, offers the expected
relationship that, at higher intensity, the increase in damage is also higher. The
effect of different PGVs on façade A is shown as an example in Figure 6.d; the
model is placed on soil B, with standard material and virgin initial condition.
The wall is subjected to one earthquake of the near type (ZN) and three PGVs
are selected: 8, 16 and 64 mm/s. The final damage is remarkably different
between the three models with an almost 100% increase between them. This
underlines the large effect of this parameter on the results.
The hand-picked examples have been selected to show the variability in crack
patterns that can be represented by the models. For example, while the walls
without openings in Figure 5.2.5 (b and c) are similar, the crack patterns differ.
This is because the cases displayed in (c) began with some pre-damage.
Consequently, the vibrations further aggravated these existing cracks.
Conversely, the cases from (b) did not have existing cracks so new cracks in the
body of the wall were generated by the vibrations; the smeared model
represents these diagonal shear cracks in clouds.

Fragility

165

b. Final damage of façade B on two different soils. Results of near earthquake, weak
material, no pre-damage, one earthquake with PGV of 96 mm/s: soil A (left) and soil B.

c. Final damage of façade B subjected to two different earthquakes. Results of soil B,
standard material, moderate pre-damage, one earthquake with PGV of 32 mm/s: near
field (left) and far field earthquake (right).
Figure 5.2.5. Hand-picked examples for comparison of the effect of the three binary
variables: flexible or rigid wall type (top row), good or poor soil type (middle row), and
near or far earthquake type, both for the Zeerijp event (bottom row).

Chapter 5

a. Final damage of two different façades on soil A, near earthquake, weak material, no
pre-damage, one earthquake with PGV of 32 mm/s: façade A (left) and façade B

166

Chapter 5

a. Final damage of façade A subjected to three different pre-damage states. Results
of soil A, standard material, near field earthquake, one earthquake with PGV of 16
mm/s: low (left), moderate (middle) and high pre-damage (right).

b. Final damage of façade B subjected to three different number of earthquakes.
Results of soil A, weak material, no pre-damage, near field earthquake with a PGV of
16 mm/s: one (left), four (middle) and eight earthquakes in a row.

c. Final damage of façade A with three different materials. Results of soil A, no predamage, far field earthquake, one earthquake with PGV of 96 mm/s: weak (left),
standard (middle) and strong material (right).

d. Final damage of façade A subjected to three different PGVs. Results of soil B,
standard material, no pre-damage, near field earthquake, one earthquake of: 8 mm/s
(left), 16 mm/s (middle) and 64 mm/s (right).
Figure 5.2.6. Hand-picked examples for comparison of the effect of the four continuous
variables: initial condition (top row), event repetition (second row), material strength
(third row), and earthquake intensity in PGV (bottom row).

Fragility

167

5.3. Regression of Damage Function from FEM Results
While the generated pool of models provides a large amount of data, it is not
sufficient to determine the probability of certain damage levels. Moreover, the
distributions of the data do not resemble the expected distributions of the
parameters. For example, an equal number of models with the weak, standard,
and strong material were analysed, but the material strength is normally
distributed, so the results of the standard material would be more likely.
There are two approaches to solve this problem. First, the results can be
weighted according to the distributions of the parameters so that the more
likely results influence the probability more prominently. This is explored later
on. Second, a surrogate function can be regressed which reproduces the data
and its results. Then, this function can be used within a Monte Carlo simulation
to predict the results of samples generated from the probabilistic distributions
of each parameter. This is treated next.

The trends observed in the multitude of analyses run to produce Figure 5.2.4
can be captured in a regression model that incorporates the effect of every
parameter varied and the relationship between the most relevant of these
parameters. To avoid a ‘black box’ effect where an arbitrary model is fit
precisely to the existing data points but may produce unexpected results
outside of the domain of the data (see section 5.3.3), a ‘reasoned model’ is
employed where the relationship between the input parameters and damage
can be understood. First, clear trends are gathered in the following order:
• The higher the PGV, the more damage is expected;
• The higher the pre-damage value, the higher the final damage. However, the
difference between initial damage and final damage diminishes when the
initial damage is higher;
• The weaker the material, the higher the final damage;
• The more flexible soil (B) led to lower damage, albeit not significantly so.
Note that the amplification that soft soils produce is not considered here
since the PGV is being used directly;
• The more flexible façade (A) showed higher damage for the near records,
while the rigid façade showed more damage for the far records;
• The larger the number of earthquakes, the higher the final damage. This
increase was marginal but consistent.

Chapter 5

5.3.1. Reasoned Regression Model Considering Ψ0

168

Chapter 5

To gain additional insight into these relationships, the three discrete variables
(soil, façade, and earthquake record) were considered independently while the
four continuous variables (PGV, material, number of events and pre-damage)
were included in a multi-variate function, and a linear Pearson correlation
between the increase in damage (ΔΨ) and the various parameters was
observed; see Figure 5.3.1.
Combination
Soil-Façade-Earthquake
B-B-WF
B-B-WN
B-B-ZF
B-B-ZN
B-A-WF
B-A-WN
B-A-ZF
B-A-ZN
A-B-WF
A-B-WN
A-B-ZF
A-B-ZN
A-A-WF
A-A-WN
A-A-ZF
A-A-ZN

PGV

N Events

0

Material

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Pearson Correlation Value

Figure 5.3.1. Pearson correlation values between ΔΨ and the different variables in the
regression model.

The Pearson correlation values range from -1 to +1, indicating perfect inverse
correlation or perfect positive correlation, respectively. A perfect correlation is
achieved when changes in one parameter are precisely reflected in the other.
First, it can be observed that the correlation of the material is slightly negative;
this means that as the material strength increases, the damage decreases.
Similarly, the initial damage has also a negative correlation, meaning that, when
the initial damage is high, the increase in damage reduces; this influence is
more important than that of the material since the values are closer to -1. Next,
the number of earthquakes has a small positive correlation indicating that a
larger number of earthquakes will also cause more damage. Comparably, the
PGV has a strong positive correlation; this is expected as the PGV is the hazard

Fragility

169

variable causing damage. Lastly, the final value of Ψ has been included in the
table to illustrate that the increase in damage ∆Ψ is not perfectly correlated
with the final damage; this hints at the importance of the initial damage
condition.
Moreover, differences between the soil, façade and earthquake type can also
be recognised: First, the initial damage and material strength seem to be more
relevant for earthquakes occurring nearby, while earthquakes farther away are
more damaging regardless. This is also reflected in the higher correlation with
the PGV. Conversely, the soft soil (B) increases the importance of the material
and the initial damage, suggesting that the damage of structures on soft soil is
more dependent on their condition, where also the repetition of earthquakes
has a larger effect as seen from the higher values associated with the
correlation of the number of earthquakes. Interestingly, the far records show a
slight inverse of the correlation between the initial damage and the increase in
damage for the stiff facade, suggesting that in these cases, the more damaged
and thus more flexible state of the wall in combination with the specific spectral
content of the far records, leads to an increase in damage. Yet, a distinct
behaviour difference cannot be established between the stiffer façade without
a window opening (B), and the more flexible façade (A).

Accordingly, the model function was shaped so as to fulfil the observations
presented and the trends observed in Figure 5.3.1 while simultaneously
employing the fewest possible number of regression coefficients. Various
regression models were tested and evaluated based on the mean value of the
residuals, the number of coefficients, and their fit to the observations. The best
model is herein presented; it constitutes a scaled sum of a logistic component
and a linear component with the PGV as the argument and the increase in
damage (ΔΨ) as the ordinate value. Both components of the function depend
on the inverse of the material and the initial damage, while the number of
earthquakes and initial damage also participate in the scaling factor.

Ψf = Ψ0 + ΔΨ
ΔΨ = β1 ⋅

( 1 + eβ 2
1

)

+ β3

Eq. 5.1
Eq. 5.2

Where β1 is the scaling factor in the function, β2 is the exponent of the logistic
component and β3 is the linear component; these are in turn defined as:

β1 =

α1 ⋅ N α 2
α

1 + Ψ0 3

Eq. 5.3

Chapter 5

Model Formulation

170

Chapter 5

1
⋅ PGV
2
β2 = 5 −
α
1 + α 4 ⋅ Ψ 0 5 + α 8 ⋅ mα 9

Eq. 5.4

β3 =

Eq. 5.5

PGV
1 + α 6 ⋅ Ψ α0 7 + α10 ⋅ mα11

Where N is the number of consecutive, identical events, m is the normalised
material strength given by the ratio of tensile strength over the tensile strength
of the standard material, and α are the eleven regression coefficients. Their
values are gathered in Figure 5.3.2 for each of the sixteen combinations of
binary variables. The fit of the model is evaluated using the mean of the
absolute values of the residuals, which is in average 0.15 Ψ points with a
deviation of 0.16 points over the sixteen sets of coefficients. This is deemed a
reasonable fit due to the scatter in the analyses’ results; the logistic component
of the model allows for a good fit to low values of damage for low values of
PGV and introduces a steepening of the relationship at a certain PGV value
(around 10 mm/s) which follows the data points adequately; this can be
observed in Figure 5.3.3. This figure also illustrates how damage remains close
to zero for very low values of PGV but then starts to increase rapidly between
values of 5 to 20 mm/s; however, for stronger materials (m=1.5), this transition
occurs more gradually into well around 50 mm/s. Therefore, the value of Ψ≥1
corresponding to the start of visible damage, appears significantly earlier for
the weaker masonry.
The regression coefficients are restricted to an interval that leads to a smooth
surface over the material parameter where only three data points are available
(weak, standard, and strong). This follows the assumption that the behaviour of
real world structures is expected to be a smooth curve. The values of the
regression coefficients, like the Pearson correlation values, hint at the
relationship between the parameters and the light damage of a masonry wall.
The regression coefficient α2 for example, indicates the influence of the
number of earthquakes; a positive number slightly larger than zero suggests a
proportional relationship between the number of earthquakes and the increase
in damage. Similarly, α3 establishes a link between the initial condition and the
increase in damage; its values in Figure 5.3.2 suggest that this link is stronger
for the flexible façade but weaker for the stiffer façade. Next, α4 and α5
determine the effect of the initial damage on the logistic part of the function
(principally for lower PGV values), while α6 and α7, indicate its effect on the
linear component of the function. Likewise, α8 and α9 link the material to the
logistic part of the model and α10 and α11 to the linear part. Strong, clear
relationships can be established in this manner, for instance, for the case of the
rigid wall (B) on soft soil (B) subjected to near Zeerijp (ZN) earthquake (B-B-ZN)

Fragility

171

and its material strength where the regression coefficients (α8 to α11) show
comparatively high values.
General

0

1

3

4

Material
8

2

0.6
2

0.4

0

0.2

0

0

-2

-2
4

0

40

-1

N
0.4

2

20

-2

0

-3

-20

20

5

60

10

40

10

0.2

9

20
0

0
6

11

0
40
20

-5
-10

Mean Abs. Error
0.2

10

7

A-A-ZN
A-A-ZF
A-A-WN
A-A-WF
A-B-ZN
A-B-ZF
A-B-WN
A-B-WF
B-A-ZN
B-A-ZF
B-A-WN
B-A-WF
B-B-ZN
B-B-ZF
B-B-WN
B-B-WF

0

5
0.1

-5

A-A-ZN
A-A-ZF
A-A-WN
A-A-WF
A-B-ZN
A-B-ZF
A-B-WN
A-B-WF
B-A-ZN
B-A-ZF
B-A-WN
B-A-WF
B-B-ZN
B-B-ZF
B-B-WN
B-B-WF

A-A-ZN
A-A-ZF
A-A-WN
A-A-WF
A-B-ZN
A-B-ZF
A-B-WN
A-B-WF
B-A-ZN
B-A-ZF
B-A-WN
B-A-WF
B-B-ZN
B-B-ZF
B-B-WN
B-B-WF

0

0

Figure 5.3.2. Values of the regression coefficients (α: 1 to 11) and mean absolute error
(in Ψ) for the sixteen sets of binary parameters.

To improve the behaviour of the regression for the sensitive and more
commonly-occurring low values of PGV, the data points below or equal to 16
mm/s are considered twice as important as the higher values by using a weight
of 2 in the least-squares model fit. The threshold of 16 mm/s was chosen, first,
because extrapolation models were available for all four earthquake repetitions
while the following model set, run at 32 mm/s, had twice the PGV value and
was present in only three of the sets. This means that the confidence to the
model fit up to 16 mm/s is higher than for points later on, and setting the

Chapter 5

A-A-ZN
A-A-ZF
A-A-WN
A-A-WF
A-B-ZN
A-B-ZF
A-B-WN
A-B-WF
B-A-ZN
B-A-ZF
B-A-WN
B-A-WF
B-B-ZN
B-B-ZF
B-B-WN
B-B-WF

0

172

Chapter 5

threshold at any value between 16 and 31 would yield the same result.
Secondly, in comparison to the PGV values that have been recorded in the field
and to the four earthquake motions, which reached PGV values below 32 mm/
s, a threshold above this interval would be too high. Since the present study
focuses on damage at low PGV values, these should be preferred in the fit.
Moreover, as seen in Table 5.2.1, the original records achieved PGV values
between 1 and 32 mm/s; scaling these records too far beyond their original
PGVs may introduce a bias further decreasing the confidence in the data points
at and above 32 mm/s. On the other hand, the value of 2 for the weight of the
fit is rather arbitrary; for a higher weight, the points above 16 mm/s become
irrelevant and are ignored, so the largest reasonable value was selected.

Figure 5.3.3. Example of the model shape and fit to the data points (squares) for the
combination of soil A, façade A and far record of the Zeerijp event.

Fragility

173

5.3.2. Model Uncertainty
The imperfect fit of the regression model, due partly to the non-smooth trends
of the data points provided by the extrapolation FE models, can be captured
by a model uncertainty parameter, ε. The parameter is considered by
modifying equation 1 such that the increase in damage, ΔΨ, is affected by ε,
which, using a Generalised Extreme Value, is randomly distributed, satisfying
the condition that the final damage can never be lower than the initial damage;
this is expressed in the following equations:

Ψf = Ψ0 + ΔΨ′

Eq. 5.6

ΔΨ′ = ΔΨ + ε ≥ 0

Eq. 5.7

ε = GE V (kgev, σgev, μgev )

Eq. 5.8

σ | kgev = γ1 ⋅ e (PGV⋅γ2 ) + γ3 ⋅ e (PGV⋅γ4 )

Eq. 5.9.a

μgev = γ5 ⋅ (1 − PGV γ6 )

Eq. 5.9.b

A three-parameter Weibull distribution, or Generalised Extreme Value
distribution, accurately follows the shape of the residuals and can be adjusted
such that its parameters (shape, scale and location, kgev, σgev and µgev, see
Table 5.3.1) become functions of PGV as is specified in Eq. 9 and are thus
defined for any value of PGV (PGV ≥ 1 mm/s). The use of a Weibull distribution
is slightly conservative because it allows for relatively large values of ε due to
its long tail to the right, yet limits the underestimation of Ψ because of the
truncated tail at its left. In this sense, the uncertainty parameter can be
assumed to include not only a degree of aleatoric uncertainty but also the
epistemic uncertainty in the FE modelling approach and crack characterisation
processes, where unforeseen conditions may trigger much-larger-thananticipated damage.

Chapter 5

The value and distribution of ε can be approximated to the average mean of
the absolute value of the residuals of the model regression and distributed
normally. However, the variability in the fit appears to be dependent on the
PGV as is visualised in Figure 5.3.4 and, moreover, the residuals are better
represented with an extreme value distribution where the actual value of Ψ
may be much larger than what is predicted by the regression model.

174

Chapter 5

Table 5.3.1. Coefficients to determine k, σ, and µ of the generalised extreme value
distribution for the PGV-dependent uncertainty of the regression model. See equation
5.9.
Coefficient

γ1

γ2

γ3

γ4

γ5

γ6

k

2814

-0.239

-2813

-0.239

-

-

σ

0.168

0.008

-0.202

-0.255

-

-

µ

-

-

-

-

0.010

0.678

FEM

-0.5

0

- R

0.5

FEM

1

1.5

-1

-0.5

Probability Density

-1

0

- R

0.5

FEM

1

1.5

-1

-0.5

0

- R

0.5

1

1.5

8 mm/s
4 mm/s

Probability Density

2 mm/s

64 mm/s
32 mm/s

16 mm/s

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

Probability Density

FEM

1

1.5

- R

96 mm/s

-1

-0.5

0
0.5
1
1.5
Histogram:- FEM - Reg.M
FEM
R
GEV Distribution Fit
Adjusted Fit

-1

-0.5

0

0.5
FEM

1

1.5

- R

Note:
Negative values correspond to an
overestimation of by the Reg.Model,
while positive values mean that the
Reg.Model underestimates .
Height of bars normalised to 0.5.
-1

-0.5

0

0.5
FEM

1

1.5

- R

Figure 5.3.4. Residuals to the fit of the regression model segregated by PGV and
Generalised Extreme Value (GEV) distribution fit for the uncertainty parameter.

Fragility

175

5.3.3. Surrogate Model with Machine Learning

The table next compares a few of the most suited models. The Root Mean
Squared Error (RMSE), which is expressed in units of Ψ and is about 0.15 for
the reasoned regression model, is displayed for each model. Note that this
value differs from Figure 5.3.2 because the data set has been cleaned
removing outliers based on the quadrants of Figure 5.2.4. The RMSE shows
that some models provide theoretically better fits to the data; the same is
reflected by the Mean Absolute Error (MAE). However, Figure 5.3.5 reveals that
this is not the case.
This figure collects one case where the data was incomplete and/or several
outliers were removed. Based on the rest of the data, the models can still make
predictions. Some models suffer from overfitting, where the data points are
followed accurately but their behaviour is chaotic outside the data. Other
models manage to capture the general trends but include behaviour that is not
expected. The decision trees, for example, reveal the expected trends for the
PGV, the Material and the Number of Earthquakes, but their discontinuous
nature makes them less suited to regression problems (they are strong for
classification problems). The Gaussian Process is very accurate in capturing the
data but also captures some of the noise present in it. The neural network
presents a similar behaviour. For this reason, another network is trained with a
limited small layer so that it would replicate only the most general and
strongest trends. This is somewhat successful but is shadowed by the
behaviour of the reasoned model.

Chapter 5

The regression model presented in the previous section uses domain
knowledge to define a function with parameters that are then fitted using a
non-linear algorithm. While this is already an example of heavily supervised
machine learning, a surrogate model can also be formulated by training
different types of regression models, as is done in this section. With the
adequate software, it is trivially easy to generate any type of model including
neural networks, multi-dimensional linear models, (binary) decision tree
models, kernel or support-vector machine models, etc. These types of models,
however, must be properly evaluated to verify that they generalise well outside
the interval (and sometimes also within) represented by the data. Expected
trends, like a positive proportional relationship between PGV and Ψ, cannot be
enforced and may be poorly represented by these models if the data is noisy
or inconsistent since they try to minimise the error between results and
predictions. While some of these issues can be addressed by pre-processing
the data and removing conflicting data points, these efforts negate the
advantages of using these automatised types of models.

176

Chapter 5

Table 5.3.2. Comparison between various types of machine learning models.
Model

RMSE

MAE

R2

Captured
observed trends

Reasoned
(Section
5.3.1)

0.136

0.077

0.927

Very Good

Ensemble
Tree

0.081

0.042

0.974

Poorly

Discontinuous

Binary Tree

0.072

0.024

0.980

Good

Discontinuous

Neural Net

0.060

0.030

0.986

Good

2 layers of 100 and 50

Gaussian
Proc.

0.024

0.009

0.998

Very Good

Probabilistic

Kernel

0.148

0.082

0.914

Very Poor

Quick

Neural Net
(Limited)

0.151

0.086

0.910

Good

2.5
Reasoned Model
Emsemble Tree
Binary Tree
Neural Net
Gaussian Proc.
Kernel
Neural Net RR
Model Data

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

50

PGV

100

Description

176 α parameters

One Layer of 5

1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0.5

1

Material

1.5

0

0

5

10

NumberOfEarthquakes

Figure 5.3.5. Trends and comparisons between various model predictions for
combinations of poor data availability.

The reasoned model is employed in subsequent sections. This is because the
generalised surrogate models lack physical accuracy in between data points
and outside the interval of the data, and because the reasoned model
performs sufficiently well with a clear error that can be assigned into a model
uncertainty parameter. In future studies, additional data could be generated by

Fragility

177

Chapter 5

running models at intermediate points where the surrogate models produce
unreliable results. Alternatively, several surrogate models could be used
simultaneously to make predictions with varying degrees of confidence
depending on the agreement of the various models. The error of the models
can also be used to fabricate an uncertainty parameter. These approaches have
not been further explored herein.

178

Chapter 5

5.4. Fragility Curves for Seismic Vibrations
5.4.1. Probabilistic distributions and Parameters
The implementation of a regression model within a Monte-Carlo simulation
framework is key to determining the probability of damage in the analysed
masonry structures. This simulation method involves taking individual samples
for each variable and determining outcomes based on these specific
combinations. The process is repeated until a sufficient number of outcomes
are evaluated, ensuring the reliability of the results. The assignment of
appropriate distributions for each relevant parameter is a crucial first step in
this process.
Material Strength: In the regression model, material strength is represented as
the ratio of the direct tensile strength to the tensile strength of a standard or
mean material. This ratio reflects the most influential material properties
identified in the Finite Element (FE) models. The tensile strength's coefficient of
variation, measured at about 30% in material tests and normally distributed,
leads to characterising the variable 'm' with a normal distribution. This
distribution has a mean of 1 and a standard deviation of 0.3. To maintain
consistency with the calibrated values (0.7, 1.0, and 1.3), the distribution is
truncated at two standard deviations.
Initial Condition of Masonry: The condition of structures in the region is still
under study, and the high variability in factors like settlements and stresses
from restrained shrinkage or thermal movements makes it challenging to assign
a specific distribution for this variable. Therefore, the simulation evaluates
discrete values for initial conditions: no-damage (Ψ0=0), invisible damage
(Ψ0=0.5), and light visible damage (Ψ0=1).
Peak Ground Velocity is employed as the hazard variable to assess the
probability of light damage. The simulations explore various PGV values within
the 1 to 100 mm/s range, aiming to establish a relationship between PGV and
damage. However, the simulation excludes the variable of multiple identical
seismic events, considering that identical amplitude events are unlikely and
require further investigation. This is explored in Chapter 6.
Masonry Wall Types: The study modelled two types of masonry walls: a rigid,
windowless shear wall and a flexible wall with a window opening. These
models introduce variability in geometry and dynamic behaviour. Since it's
impractical to assign a specific state to existing structures, a uniform
distribution is used, with each wall type assigned an arbitrary 50% probability.

Fragility

179

Type of Earthquake Motion and Soil Type: The correlation between PGV and
the proximity of an earthquake (near or far) is intuitive, with higher PGVs likely
caused by nearby events. A statistical study on historical data from January
1993 to December 2019 (for earthquakes with at least Mw≥1.5) was
conducted, using GMPEs by Bommer et al. to compute regional PGVs. This
study, coupled with a simplified database of buildings (see Appendix A),
helped determine the distance and intensity of seismic events relative to
buildings. Figure 5.4.1 illustrates the ratio of near to far events for various PGV
intervals, showing a trend where higher local PGVs often correspond to events
within a 2 km radius. A correlation function is used in the simulation, assigning
a 10% probability of a nearby event at 1 mm/s PGV and a 90% probability at 35
mm/s PGV. This is formulated into Equation 5.10.

f

1.9

(PGV ) =
− 0.9
Near
1 + e −0.08⋅(1+PGV )
Near + Far

Equation 5.10

Soil Type Probability: The likelihood of encountering stiff or soft soil was
statistically determined for buildings experiencing at least 1 mm/s PGV. The
vertical shear wave velocity (Vs10) of the soil was calculated based on microzonation studies (Kruiver et al. 2017). Locations with Vs10 greater than 100 m/s
were classified as stiff soil, and those with lower Vs10 as soft soil. This
classification aligns with soil parameters in Table 2, resulting in a binary
distribution that assigns a 95% probability to stiff soil (A) and 5% to soft soil (B).
1
0.9

Ratio of Near Events

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

2 km
2.5 km
3 km
4 km
5 km
Correlation Function f

0.2
0.1
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

PGV in mm/s

Figure 5.4.1. Correlation between PGV and near-type records from statistical, historical
data. Low PGV values often correspond to events with an epicentre located farther
away, while PGV values above 10 mm/s are more likely to correspond to events
originating less than 3 km away.

Chapter 5

Where f is the probability of an event being near given the PGV.

180

Chapter 5

5.4.2. Results of Monte Carlo Simulation
In the Monte Carlo simulation, values for material strength, soil type,
earthquake type, model uncertainty, and wall type are sampled from their
respective distributions. Equation 5.6 is then used to determine the final
damage for discrete values of initial condition (Ψ0= 0, 0.5, 1, and 1.5) and PGV.
The final damage values are categorised into intervals between zero and three
in half-point increments. The simulation was executed with over ten million
points for each discrete combination of initial condition and PGV to ensure
sufficiency. The results are illustrated in Figure 5.4.2 as fragility curves,
depicting the probability of exceeding various light damage levels based on
the initial masonry condition and PGV. The discrete values obtained from the
simulation are indicated, and a simple spline is fitted to these points.
At a PGV of 10 mm/s, the probability of reaching or exceeding visible damage
(Ψ≥1) is only 5% when no initial damage is present (Figure 2.a). This probability
significantly increases to about 20% when minor, initially invisible damage
(Ψ0=0.5) is present (Figure 2.b). The curves are relatively flat, indicating a wide
variability in input parameters. However, for low pre-damage (Ψ0≤0.5), the
curves for visible damage initially steepen, suggesting vulnerability to light
cracking at low PGV values. The graphs in Figures 2.c and 2.d, corresponding
to already visible initial damage (Ψ0≥1), show that light damage is unlikely to
worsen significantly unless earthquake vibration intensity is relatively high, with
PGV values above 40 mm/s (approximately 0.12g PGA).
The simulations also indicate that near-type records are more damaging to
masonry walls, suggesting a more conservative assessment for low-rise
masonry buildings using near-type earthquake records. Despite using only two
types of masonry walls to represent in-plane behaviour, the variability
introduced should capture the probabilistic spread for a broader range of
buildings. However, it is essential to note that the study focuses on damage in
bare masonry or at continuous corners, not on connections between walls and
floors or adjacent walls. The light damage in these joint areas, which this study
does not contemplate, is also challenging to quantify and is a future topic.
A notable aspect in the graphs is the initial plateau between 1 and 10 mm/s
before the curves slope upward. This plateau indicates a consistent probability
of damage at low PGV values, likely due to the model uncertainty parameter ε,
based on variability observed in the limited number of FE models. This
suggests that low PGV values can trigger visible damage in certain scenarios,
especially when initial damage and residual stresses are present. Further
studies are needed to analyse very low vibrations combined with multiple initial
damage factors, particularly relevant for regions like Groningen.

20

PGV in mm/s

40

60

0

=2.0
=2.5
=3.0

f
f
f

Chapter 5

10

=1.5
f

20

PGV in mm/s

40

60

0.4

0.6

0

10

=1.0
f

0

=0.5
f

0.8

0.2

0

=1.5

Damage

0

60

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

d.

40

0

=0.5

PGV in mm/s

0

0

20

0.2

b.

10

0.2

=1

0

0.4

0

60

0.4

c.

40

0.6

=0

PGV in mm/s

0.6

0

20

0.8

a.

10

Exceedance Probability
Exceedance Probability

Exceedance Probability

Exceedance Probability

0.8

0

Fragility
181

Figure 5.4.2. Fragility or vulnerability curves for various initial damage conditions (Ψ0)
and final damage thresholds (Ψf).

182

Chapter 5

The curves show that the probability of exceeding Ψ=3 are comparatively small
even at higher values of PGV. However, given that these Ψ values approach the
end of light damage (and continue towards near-collapse) and that the
consequences of failure can be severe, probabilities of around 1% are not
small. The Eurocode prescribes, for instance, a failure probability of 10-5 against
structural failure. Nevertheless, the fragility curves focus on the lower damage
and should be viewed in that context. A log-normal fit to the curves is provided
in Figure 5.4.3 for future reference, with parameters detailed in Table 5.4.2.
Table 5.4.2. Lognormal parameters for the start of the fragility curves determined.
Ψ0 = 0

Ψfinal

Ψ0 = 0.5
µ

Ψ0 = 1.0
σ

µ

Ψ0 = 1.5

µ

σ

σ

0.5

2.604

0.624

1.0

3.370

0.725

3.002

0.931

1.5

4.323

0.860

4.070

0.983

3.411

1.034

2.0

5.518

1.082

5.523

1.259

5.293

1.444

4.631

1.860

2.5

7.416

1.516

7.758

1.780

7.955

2.091

7.929

2.585

3.0

8.869

1.729

11.287

2.606

11.913

3.034

12.363

3.610

NA

µ

σ

NA

NA

Table 5.4.1. Results of vulnerability curves for key PGV values. The table shows the
probability of fired-clay brick masonry walls entering the Damage State 1 range at Ψ=1
and the probability of exceeding DS1 with Ψ=2, for two different initial conditions of the
masonry (Ψ0), where sensitive, pre-cracked masonry is characterised with Ψ0≈0.5.
PGV
Peak Ground
Velocity

Probability of DS1 (1 ≤ Ψ ≤ 2)
No initial damage
Ψ0=0

Light, yet imperceptible initial
damage
Ψ0≈0.5

Ψ≥1

Ψ≥2

Ψ≥1

Ψ≥2

5 mm/s

1%

< 0.1%

6%

0.1%

10 mm/s

6%

0.2%

21%

0.6%

15 mm/s

19%

0.5%

40%

1%

20 mm/s

32%

1%

52%

2%

30 mm/s

48%

3%

61%

5%

40 mm/s

60%

6%

66%

9%

Fragility

183
PGV in mm/s

Exceedance Probability

a.

0

20

PGV in mm/s
400

=0

b.

0

20

40

=0.5

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0
c.

0

=1

d.

0.8

Exceedance Probability

10

0

=1.5

f
f
f
f

0.4

f
f

=0.5
=1.0

0.6

=1.5
=2.0
=2.5

0.4

=3.0

Original
Fit (1-30 mm/s)

0.2

0

0.8

LogNormal Comparison

0.6

0

10

20

400

PGV in mm/s

Exceedance Probability

10

10

Exceedance Probability

0

0.2

20

0
40

PGV in mm/s

The key values extracted from the curves are compiled in Table 5.4.1. These
results underline the importance of considering a range of factors, including
initial damage and model uncertainty, in assessing the probability of light
damage in masonry structures due to seismic vibrations. The study’s approach
to defining damage probabilistically based on visible cracks provides a more
precise understanding of seismic vulnerability, especially for low earthquake
vibrations.

Chapter 5

Figure 5.4.3. LogNormal fit to fragility curves.

184

Chapter 5

5.4.3. Comparisons to other Studies
Comparing the fragility curves developed in this study, which outline a range
for Damage State 1 (DS1) with Ψ values between one and two (1 ≤Ψ≤ 2), to
those from other authors is crucial. Typically, other studies define DS1 or DS2
with a single line indicating exceedance probability, often without clear
differentiation between incursion into or exceedance of a damage state.
However, before making any comparisons, several key aspects need to be
underscored. Chief among these are the metrics used for quantifying damage
and the representation of the seismic hazard.
In this study, PPGV serves as the primary measure of the seismic hazard. This
choice is influenced by guidelines and studies on low structural vibrations,
including non-earthquake-related vibrations, where PGV is preferred due to its
better correlation with vibration energy. Given the focus on low earthquake
vibrations, PGV was chosen to facilitate comparisons with other vibration
sources, such as trains, construction activities, and normal structural use.
Traditionally, earthquake intensity is gauged using Peak Ground Acceleration
(PGA), which relates more directly to the forces acting on structures—a crucial
factor when assessing structural strength capacity, but less relevant for
evaluating light damage. Pseudo acceleration (Sa) is also employed to describe
amplified dynamic forces on structures, but its dependency on a structure’s
natural vibration period makes it less suitable for a singular hazard measure.
For the upcoming comparisons, the average transfer factors from this study’s
four signals are used to approximate the relationship between PGA and PGV
(26.4 s/s2). For Sa, the upper envelope of the spectra in Figure 5.2.2 aids in
establishing the ratio between Sa and PGA at different structural periods. Next,
the study’s unique approach to measuring damage, focusing explicitly on light
damage quantified by visible cracks on masonry walls, must be noted. This
contrasts with most other studies that either use qualitative descriptions of light
damage or infer it indirectly based on parameters related to ultimate structural
strength. Hence, comparing DS1 outcomes from this study to others presents
challenges.
Furthermore, factors like geometry and material, structural configuration and
connections, earthquake types, and soil and foundation considerations vary
significantly across studies, making direct comparisons feasible only within an
order of magnitude. Figure 5.4.4 attempts to make these comparisons, despite
the detailed and complex nature of the data.
In Figure 3.a, FEMA guidelines specify drift limits for DS1. Assuming these
limits correspond to a 5% exceedance probability of DS1 (with a 50%

Fragility

185

probability at twice the drift limit), the light damage probabilities for infill and
non-infill masonry walls align with the highlighted PGV range up to 60 mm/s.
Okada et al.’s study on timber-frame buildings, Gehl et al.’s study using 3Muri
software, and Abo-El-Ezz et al.’s research on Canadian rubble stone masonry
provide contrasting curves, reflecting differences in structural vulnerability and
modelling approaches.
Empirical DS1 curves from Crowley et al., based on regional damage data up
to 2015, present a closer fit to the DS1 range defined in this study. These
curves, particularly for post-1940 unreinforced masonry and vulnerable
masonry farmhouses, align well with the upper threshold of Ψ=1 and the midrange of the DS1 interval. However, these empirical curves, extrapolated from
data points available only for PGV values below 20mm/s, seem to slightly
underestimate light damage compared to the fragility curves developed in this
study.

HAZUS guidelines and Van Elk et al.’s building fragility curves, alongside
Milosević et al.’s research on unreinforced masonry with rubble stone and
hollow brick, also offer comparative insights. Waarts’ linear-elastic analyses on
masonry façades further illustrate the variance in perceived damage at low
PGVs.
In summary, the DS1 range defined by Ψ values of 1 to 2, despite differences in
structural typology and masonry material, is comparable to other studies
focusing on low damage states in masonry. While the strength of this work lies
in its precise definition of damage and the use of complex FEM models for
realistic crack monitoring, the limitation in the number of earthquake motions
analysed is a notable weakness. This constraint results from the high
computational demands of these models, which in turn limits the
representation of record-to-record variability. Future advancements in
computational capabilities and modelling strategies are anticipated to allow for
more comprehensive analyses and a better depiction of the inherent
uncertainty in seismic fragility curves.

Chapter 5

Other studies examining DS2, compared in Figure 3.b, include Kallioras et al.’s
dynamic tests on calcium-silicate masonry terraced houses and Crowley et al.’s
DS2 fragility curve. These studies, while offering insights, highlight differences
in structural typology and material vulnerability, affecting the positioning of
their curves relative to the DS1 range.

186

Chapter 5
DS1:
1
2
f

PGV in mm/s
Exceedance Probability

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

1

Comparison against DS1 with

0.8

non-infill URM
FEMA

infill URM

0.4

Okada et al.

Timber-frame

0.2

Gehl et al.

Masonry Façade

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

Abo-El-Ezz et al.

35

Monumental rubble stone

PGA in %g

Crowley et al.

Empirical: LowRise URM

PGV in mm/s
0

Exceedance Probability

=0

FEMA

0.6

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

1

Crowley et al.

Empirical: Farmhouses
Comparison against DS2 with

0.8

0

=0

Kallioras et al.

CaSi Terraced

0.6

Crowley et al.

URM-3L: CaSi Terraced

0.4

Crowley et al.

Other URM

0.2

FEMA

URM slight damage (DS1-2)

0
0

5

0

Exceedance Probability

0

10

5

15

20

25

30

Van Elk et al.

35

Unspecified Masonry System

PGA in %g

Milosevic et al.

PGV in mm/s

Rubble stone + hollow brick

10

15

20

25

30

0.25

Waarts

Masonry (G): Damage Ini.
Zoomed-in Comparison with

0.2

0

=0.5

=1.0
f
=2.0

0.15

f
Crowley et al.

0.1

Empirical: LowRise URM
Crowley et al.

0.05

Empirical: Farmhouses
Waarts

Masonry (G): Damage Ini.

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

PGA in %g

Figure 5.4.4. Comparisons with other authors.

8

Fragility

187

5.4.4. Fragility Maps

This is an example of the potential application of the proposed fragility curves.
The figure includes six cases distributed for three relevant seismic events and
two cases of ∆Ψ for the threshold of visible damage (Ψ=1). This is the strictest
threshold for the initiation of light damage. The maps show the probability
depending on the distance and magnitude to the epicentres of the events
using the empirical formulation of ground motion prediction equations of
Bommer et al. (2019); these equations include probabilistic terms. The
earthquake of Huizinge of 2012 leads to the highest probabilities with most of
the region being enclosed by the contour indicating that invisible damage
(Ψ0=0.5) has a 1% probability of being aggravated to visible damage due to
this event.
Finally, a summarising figure is elaborated: Figure 5.4.6. Here, the history of all
earthquake events, with a magnitude of Mw=2 or more, is analysed to
determine the distribution of maximum PGV at any location. Based on this
distribution, the probability is computed for a ∆Ψ of 0.5 with a Ψ0=1. This
corresponds to masonry structures that were exhibiting just visible damage
before the seismicity begun; this damage was then worsened such that its cost
for repair is mostly linked to the earthquake vibrations; see Table 2.2.4. Note
that this figure considers only the maximum PGV and not the accumulation of
damage from repeated events; this is treated in Chapter 6. Whether
progressively accumulating damage over time due to smaller and larger events
will lead to a worse situation will be examined.
Indeed, Figure 6 reveals an interesting observation: for older masonry
structures, which are likely to display some visible damage and for which the
material properties of this study have been tailored to, there is a small
probability (>1/1000) of considerable damage aggravation (∆Ψ=0.5) within the
entire Groningen region. There are about 100 thousand buildings from before
1945 within the entire region; see Appendix A.2. Given this small probability

Chapter 5

The fragility curves can be superimposed with the earthquake hazard at the
spacial scale. Bommer et al. (2019) formulated GMPEs that describe the
hazard’s intensity in a probabilistic manner at any location in the Groningen
region. The probabilistic distribution in PGV can then be convoluted and
integrated with the fragility curves, which describe the probability between
PGV and damage in terms of Ψ, so that the probability of damage given a
certain event can be computed. The epicentres of earthquakes events are
known from the database of the Dutch meteorological institute, KNMI. Hence,
this exercise is conducted for a few illustrative events and the result is drawn in
Figure 5.4.5. Each event is described with a distribution of PGV at any location.

188

Chapter 5

and the number of buildings, one can determine the probability of at least n
buildings showing this level of aggravated damage using the following
equation derived from a binomial distribution:

P(X ≥ n) = 1 −

N
p k (1 − p) N−k
∑(k)
n−1

Equation 5.11

k=0

where N is the total number of buildings in the region (assumed 100 thousand),
p is the failure probability of each building (assumed 1/1000), and n is the
minimum number of buildings with failure. Note that N over k represents the
number of possibilities to choose k from N. This equation might be numerically
challenging for small values of p and k, but can be solved with specific
computational methods.
It is almost certain that at least ten buildings (n=10) have developed a ∆Ψ=0.5,
assuming that all N=100’000 buildings started with Ψ0=1 and neglecting the
higher probabilities towards the centre of the region. However, the probability
of at least 100 buildings (n=100) showing this damage quickly diminishes to
50%, and the probability of 150 buildings is below 1%; again, under the
aforementioned assumptions. In addition, this calculation assumes
independence between buildings; this means that parameters are not
correlated between buildings. While the strength of the buildings, for instance,
is unlikely to be correlated between buildings, the near-far distribution of the
earthquake type, could be.
To determine a more accurate probability, the initial condition of all the
structures would need to be estimated. Moreover, when each building has a
different probability (dependent on its location on the map), the problem
cannot be solved analytically. Instead, a simulation is needed. This requires
additional study.

189

Chapter 5

Fragility

Figure 5.4.5. Probability maps from the convolution of PGV distributions and the fragility
curves proposed. The buffer zone of 6 kilometres around the Groningen gas field is
demarked.

190

Chapter 5

Figure 5.4.6. Probability map for the historical maximum PGV convoluted with the
masonry fragility determined in this chapter. The case of ∆Ψ=0.5 for an initial condition
of just visible damage is exemplified. Note that the lines are truncated do the model
domain.

Fragility

191

5.5. Fragility Curves for Settlements from Soil Curvatures
In a related study [27], the extrapolated models of Section 5.2 were further
modified to consider façade geometries. Moreover, the goal was adapted to
determine the fragility of buildings for slow, vertical soil movements.
Indeed, instead of applying a dynamic soil motion underneath the foundation,
a quasi-static displacement was applied similar to the pre-damage phase of the
models in the previous sections. The shape and intensity of this displacement
was varied in order to relate the intensity of the static soil motion to the
probability of damage. In this manner, following a similar approach as sections
5.2 to 5.4, fragility curves can be produced. See also Appendix A.13.

5.5.1. Overview of Semi-Coupled Models of Masonry Façades
The displacement applied underneath the foundation depends on the type of
hazard that is being modelled. In general, horizontal and vertical displacements
can be applied and will correspond to different hazards. For instance, land
subsidence over large regions may lead to more prominent horizontal
deformations as the vertical deformations are smeared out over a large area.
Conversely, local effects, such as swelling of sensitive clays, will impart mostly
vertical displacements and negligible horizontal displacements. Analysing a
combination of both effects is an intricate problem reserved for another study.
In this work, the effect of vertical displacements will be used to illustrate the
approach for relating soil movements to light damage fragility.
Asymmetric Hogging
(Left Hogging LH)

Symmetric Hogging (SH)

β
β
Figure 5.5.1. Scheme of a model of a façade subjected to a deformation of which the
idealised shape is characterised with the angular distortion, β.

Chapter 5

Displacement at the Foundation

192

Chapter 5

If the vertical displacements applied underneath a foundation are completely
uniform, then no damage will arise. It is a varying displacement field, leading to
differential settlements, that will lead to deformations, stresses, and cracks in a
masonry façade. There are several parameters that can be used to characterise
the intensity of the applied displacement, analogous to the PGV or PGA of an
earthquake vibration. Prosperi et al. (2020) showed that the angular distortion
is better correlated to visible masonry damage. If the displacement shape is
idealised as a bilinear curve, then the angle these curves and the overall tilt
would be the angular distortion; see Figure 5.5.1. Hence, in this work, the
angular distortion, β, as proposed by Boscardin & Cording (1989), is used as
the intensity parameter of the subsidence hazard.
Masonry Façades
Subjecting walls to vertical soil deformations is insufficient to adequately
characterise the sensitivity of masonry façade to static soil movements. This is
because longer façades are more vulnerable to differential settlements. For this
purpose, several geometries for masonry façades were collected, inspired by
real damage cases (Van Staalduinen et al. 2018, for instance) and cadaster
information (Appendix A.2). The goal was to elaborate representative
geometries with which the effect of the length of the façade could be
evaluated. The foundation of the façades is also included since it plays a crucial
role. For this study, only unreinforced foundations, such as traditional masonry
foundations employed in older structures, typically erected before 1945, are
considered.
Model Variations
As with the walls, several parameters are varied to evaluate the sensitivity and
vulnerability of the façades. Firstly, the material is modified with five variations,
a weaker and a stronger version than already evaluated, thus with relative
tensile strength of 0.5 and 1.5 in addition to 0.7, 1.0, and 1.3. Secondly, the soil
profile, idealised underneath the façade with the interface, is also varied as in
Section 5.2 with Soils A and B corresponding to a sandy and a peaty clay.
Thirdly, in addition to the soil profile which determines the properties of the
interface as per Table 5.2.2, one of the properties is varied independently. The
normal interface stiffness has a large influence in how the deformations are
transferred from the soil (bottom of the interface) to the masonry (top of the
interface). For this reason, a low and a high stiffness are also considered in the
variations. For these, the original value is divided or multiplied by ten.
Fourthly, some variations are assigned to the representation of the hazard. Two
settlement shapes are considered: a symmetric hogging and an asymmetric

Fragility

193

hogging. Additionally, the shapes are modified by varying the location of the
’knick’ point. This results in four displacement shapes as illustrated in Figure
5.5.3. The intensity of the displacements, measured by the angular distortion,
is increased continuously in the analyses over the load steps. This is unlike the
PGV intensity which had to be scaled for each analysis. The continuous
variation allows extracting the β values for which key values of Ψ are displayed.
1A
2A

3A

4A

Figure 5.5.2. Four façade geometries for fired-clay brick. These are identical to existing
buildings.

Shapes
LH3
LH5
SH2
SH4

Façade Length

Vertical Displacement

Normalised to equal settlement (different )

Façade Length

Figure 5.5.3. Four settlement shapes. The numbers after the shapes (left or symmetric
hogging) indicate the location of the ‘knick’: at a third, a fifth, a quarter or in the middle.
Sagging shapes were not considered.

Chapter 5

Vertical Displacement

Normalised to equal

194

Chapter 5

Finally, geometric variations are included. These are not limited to the four
main façade geometries presented but permute variations in length and
opening ratio. A list of the geometries considered is collected in Table 5.5.1.
Also, Figure 5.5.2b shows an overview of the geometry variations.
Table 5.5.1. List of façade geometries and their geometrical features.
Façade Variation Length (m) Height (m)

Opening Ratio

Large Openings

L/H

1A

7.00

5.50

0.235

FALSE

1.27

1B

5.50

5.50

0.235

FALSE

1.00

1C

8.48

5.50

0.235

FALSE

1.54

1D

7.00

7.00

0.235

FALSE

1.00

1E

7.00

3.80

0.235

FALSE

1.84

1F

7.00

5.50

0.317

FALSE

1.27

1G

7.00

5.50

0.416

FALSE

1.27

1H

7.00

5.50

0.145

FALSE

1.27

1I

7.00

5.50

0.317

TRUE

1.27

1J

7.00

5.50

0.416

TRUE

1.27

2A

17.00

3.80

0.09

FALSE

4.47

3A

6.80

7.10

0.214

TRUE

0.96

3B

4.80

7.10

0.214

TRUE

0.68

3C

8.80

7.10

0.214

TRUE

1.24

3D

6.80

10.00

0.214

TRUE

0.68

3E

6.80

4.20

0.214

TRUE

1.62

3F

6.80

7.10

0.13

FALSE

0.96

3G

6.80

7.10

0.304

TRUE

0.96

4A

12.00

3.00

0.174

TRUE

4.00

4B

6.00

3.00

0.174

TRUE

2.00

4C

9.00

3.00

0.174

TRUE

3.00

4D

12.00

4.80

0.174

TRUE

2.50

4E

12.00

6.60

0.174

TRUE

1.82

4F

12.00

3.00

0.1

TRUE

4.00

4G

12.00

3.00

0.328

TRUE

4.00

These permutations sum up three thousand variations without considering the
values for the angular distortion. If the β values corresponding to Ψ of 0.5, 1.0,
1.5, 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0 are extracted, then over 15 thousand data points are
collected. However, some models never reach the upper values of Ψ for the
angular intensities applied. Unrealistic values of β, above 1/100, would have to
be applied for these models to display large values of Ψ. This is because those
particular cases, a slender façade with few openings and strong material for
example, are particularly robust.

Fragility

195

Figure 5.5.2b. Geometry variations of the 25 façades.

The entire pool of results is presented in Figure 5.5.4 which indicates, as a
table but with colour, the value of applied angular distortion (β) required to
generate damage measured with a Ψ=1. The lighter the colour, the smaller the
β required to cause damage, meaning that the particular façade is susceptible
to damage. This is the case of façade 4G which sports the lowest values overall
besides façade 2A for which only a few models were run. In contrast, façade 3B
is linked to dark colours and missing values. This observation is linked to the
large difference in L/H ratio of the façades; the long façade with large openings
is most vulnerable to soil deformations, while the slender, tall façade remains
rigid against settlement shapes and thus also undamaged.
Other effects are also recognisable. For instance, the settlement shapes that
affect most of the façade (LH3 and SH2) are more damaging than the once
affecting only the corners; also, asymmetric shapes are more serious than
symmetric shapes. Furthermore, the softer Soil B allows for larger β before
reaching Ψ=1. This is because its lower stiffness helps accommodate the soil
deformation and ‘cushions’ the façade. Similarly, the material strength affects
the required β; the better material (1.5), both stiffer and stronger, resists
cracking. The stiffness of the interface has a less discernible influence. The
lower stiffness makes the buildings slightly more vulnerable than the original

Chapter 5

Model Results

196

Chapter 5

value, but the higher stiffness makes them a bit more vulnerable, too. For the
stiffer case, this is reasonable since the interface doesn’t help accommodate
the applied settlement. For the interface with the low stiffness, the lack of
support makes the deformation on the building more pronounced. The normal
interface is thus the least detrimental to the façades. Finally, the various
façades differ in their geometry, the size and relative ratio of the openings, and
principally, in the length/height ratio. From these, one can observe that the
longer façades, with a higher L/H ratio are most vulnerable. Larger opening
ratios and larger openings are also unfavourable.
Settlement
Shape
LH3
SH4 LH5
SH2

for

10-2

=1

10-1

10-3

10-4

Angular Distortion

Interface Original Interface High
Soil A
Interface Low
Interface Original Interface High
Soil B

1.5
1.3
1
0.7
0.5
1.5
1.3
1
0.7
0.5
1.5
1.3
1
0.7
0.5
1.5
1.3
1
0.7
0.5
1.5
1.3
1
0.7
0.5
1.5
1.3
1
0.7
0.5

Interface Low

Relative Material Strength

Façade Variations
1A 1B 1C 1D 1E 1F 1G 1H 1I 1J 2A 3A 3B 3C 3D 3E 3F 3G 4A 4B 4C 4D 4E 4F 4G

10-5

10-6

Figure 5.5.4. Color Diamonds for the almost three thousand FEM model results with
several façade geometry variations.

As a few examples, Figure 5.5.5 collects the crack analyses of four different
façades at similarly large values of Ψ. The applied distortion to generate this
damage is very different, however. For façades 1B, 1C, 3C, and 3D, β are
1/100, 1/1300, 1/150, 1/400 for shapes SH2, SH4, SH2, and SH4 respectively.

Fragility

197

All but façade 1C are on Soil B. Both façades 1 are of the weakest material,
while façades 3C and 3D are of the standard (1.0) and slightly strong material
(1.3). Façade 1B has the low stiffness interface, façade 1C the high stiffness,
and the rest the original stiffness.
These permutations allow some specific comparisons besides some general
observations. First, cracks form around windows, typically at corners, at the
centre or around lintels. Most cracks are horizontal or vertical, which is
consistent with settlement-related cracking (de Vent, 2011). In most cases, the
widest cracks are vertical and are the result of bending of the façade. The
longer façade 1C reaches higher damage at a tenth of the soil distortion
applied to 1B even though the SH4 shape acting on 1C is less damaging.
The cases selected for façades 3C and 3D are exceptions to the general trends:
the taller façade is more vulnerable. This seems to be related to the geometry
and the settlement shape. The symmetric shape at a quarter of the façade
length (SH4) is typically less damaging than the shape that goes to the centre
of the façade (SH2). For the geometry of façade 3D, because of the window
layout, two piers at the edges carry most of the weight. This forces additional
bending of the spandrel underneath the large window which results in a wider
crack than the similar crack of its sibling, 3C. In this case, the stronger and
stiffer material of façade 3D is detrimental.
1C

Chapter 5

1B

3D
3C

Figure 5.5.5. Crack plots of 4 façades with values around DS1/DS2 (Ψ≈2.5).

198

Chapter 5

5.5.2. Fragility Curves for Soil Angular Distortion: β vs. Ψ
The ultimate goal, as with the relationship between PGV and Ψ, is to produce
fragility curves in terms of Ψ for increasing β intensity.
Damage Regression
Since the number of data points is reasonably large, there are three good
possibilities to shape a relationship between the varied parameters and
damage. First, a reasoned model could be shaped to capture this relationship,
as was done in Section 5.3. However, the number of parameters being varied is
large and there are inter-relationships that could play an important role,
especially within the variations of the hazard and the geometry. This exercise,
to formulate a set of equations that capture these relationships, quickly
becomes unfeasible.
Second, the large number of results can already be used to determine a
probability of failure using weights. For example, for an applied distortion
value of 1/500, about 20% of the two thousand models have exceeded a
damage level corresponding to Ψ =2.5. Given the limited number of models,
this approach loses confidence at very low values of probability where only one
or two models have crossed the threshold. This can be reasonably
compensated by applying a log-normal distribution fit to the results.
Furthermore, not all models should be considered equally. Houses built with
masonry that closely matches the average material properties are more likely to
appear in the region than houses that correspond to the ‘very strong’ set of
material parameters. This spread in material parameters can be captured with a
probabilistic distribution; characterisation experiments in the lab have shown
that the tensile strength follows a normal distribution with a 30% variance, for
example.
Similarly, the distributions of the other parameters that have been varied, such
as the soil type, the settlement profile shape, etc. can be determined. Then,
the models can be weighted so as to reproduce the likelihood of their
combination of parameters appearing in buildings in the region; in this manner,
the probability of failure for a more realistic combination of situations can be
estimated. Correlations between the various parameters, such as weaker soilstructure interfaces being more likely on the softer soil for instance, can also be
included. A structure with a material far from average, on bad soil but with a
stiff soil-structure interface, subjected to a symmetric soil settlement profile that
only deforms the ends of a short foundation, would receive the lowest weight
possible of 0.06; while, a structure of average material, on the stiff soil and also
a stiff soil-structure interface that transfers an asymmetric settlement distortion

Fragility

199

to a long foundation, would receive the highest weight of 4.5. These examples
exclude weights assigned due to the geometry of the walls. It must be said,
that this weighing approach can only be used if the various model variations
cover the range of typical parameters found in real cases. This comprises some
limitations.

In [27] the weighting approach has been employed on the basis of the same
model results. In this section, however, a machine learning model is trained.
Specifically, a classification neural network is chosen since it may provide
accurate predictions for a high invariance in the importance or relevance of the
input parameters as is the case for the leading variable, the angular distortion,
which determines the degree of damage of the masonry façades.
Other types of models were also tested, such as (ensemble) trees, kernels,
naive Bayes models, and (optimised) linear models, but their accuracy was
limited to 30% of correct predictions or less. A support vector machine model
reached an accuracy of 55% but was very slow. In contrast, the neural network
with three interconnected layers achieved an accuracy of 70% for Ψ classes at
intervals of 0.5 and a prediction speed of millions of points per second; see
Figure 5.5.6. Given the façade’s length, its opening ratio, its length/height
ratio, the shape and location of the knick of the applied displacement profile,
the relative material strength, the soil type, the interface stiffness type, and the
applied angular distortion, the model predicts the category of Ψ. See later
Table 5.5.2 for a summary of these predictors.

Chapter 5

Third, a (semi-)unsupervised machine learning model could be trained. Since
β is varied continuously, Ψ is extracted at discrete intervals. This means that the
response variable, Ψ, has distinct values or categories. The model to train is
thus a classification model. These types of models are usually more successful
than general regression models. Once the model is trained and validated
against a (reserved) portion of the data, it can be used to predict values of Ψ
for any combination of parameters. Hence, the parameters can be assigned
realistic, probabilistic distributions and sampled within a MonteCarlo
simulation. Weighting is not required since the samples follow the assigned
distributions. In this manner, the probability of damage can be computed, and
unlike the weighting approach, small probabilities can also be more reliably
simulated.

200

Chapter 5

<1

2567
16.3%

148
0.9%

37
0.2%

22
0.1%

18
0.1%

15
0.1%

91.4%
8.6%

=1.0

159
1.0%

2345
14.9%

150
1.0%

55
0.3%

40
0.3%

34
0.2%

84.3%
15.7%

=1.5

50
0.3%

166
1.1%

2147
13.6%

183
1.2%

74
0.5%

68
0.4%

79.9%
20.1%

=2.0

22
0.1%

37
0.2%

190
1.2%

1922
12.2%

332
2.1%

187
1.2%

71.4%
28.6%

=2.5

14
0.1%

18
0.1%

36
0.2%

229
1.5%

1446
9.2%

531
3.4%

63.6%
36.4%

3.0

19
0.1%

36
0.2%

73
0.5%

164
1.0%

616
3.9%

1621
10.3%

64.1%
35.9%

90.7%
9.3%

85.3%
14.7%

81.5%
18.5%

74.6%
25.4%

57.2%
42.8%

66.0%
34.0%

76.4%
23.6%

<1

=1
.0

=1
.5

=2
.0

=2
.5

3.
0

FEM Model Result

Confusion Matrix

NN Prediction

Figure 5.5.6. Confusion chart of the classification neural network.

Uncertainty
The classification model can then be used for a MonteCarlo simulation. Yet, the
model is not perfectly accurate; it fails to correctly predict about 30% of the
training data. In most cases, the prediction is one category away from the true
value, so if the numerical model determined Ψ=2.0, the classification model
predicts Ψ=2.5 or Ψ=1.5. A slightly higher accuracy could be achieved by
overfitting the model to the training data. This is not desired, since the model
could produce unexpected values if the input parameters differ from the
precise training inputs employed. To prevent overfitting, a 5-fold validation
scheme was used.
Another strategy to improve the model’s accuracy is by finding predictors that
are better related to damage. For example, other geometric features of the

Fragility

201

façades, like the distance between the windows or the heights of the spandrels
could better reflect the vulnerability of the buildings. Perhaps the location of
the knick point in relationship to the location of the façades’ openings could
also function as an alternative predictor yielding higher accuracy. Furthermore,
‘deep learning’ could be employed to extract additional predictors. This is
outside of the scope of this work, however.

The uncertainty is modelled directly from the confusion matrix. Since the
classification problem leads to discrete values, if the model predicts a certain
value of Ψ, the other values in the column give the probability that the true
value was a different one. For example, for a prediction of Ψ=1, there is a
probability of 10% that the true value was Ψ=0.5 or Ψ=1.5 (about 5% each)
and approximately 2% that it was Ψ=2.0.
Damage Simulation
The various input parameters for the regression model are assigned
probabilistic distributions as per Table 5.5.2. These distributions are assumed
from various sources. First, the geometry of the façade is represented by four
parameters: its length, its length/height ratio, its opening ratio and whether
there are large openings. The first two are sourced from the 3D-BAG database;
see Appendix A.2. Post-processing the database for the length and height of
walls reveals a log-normal distribution where walls about three meters in width
are most common and a long tail shows walls of fifteen metres are also present.
Similarly the height is characterised to then extract the length/height ratio. To
date, the 3D-BAG database does not yet include openings such as doors or
windows. Therefore, a distribution is derived from the opening ratios present in
the modelled façades. These have been inspired by historic structures and
compared to reports of damage cases. Finally, the indicator for large openings
(true/false) is correlated to the opening ratio. An opening ratio of 30% for

Chapter 5

Consequently, the original predictors have been maintained. In fact, the small
inaccuracy of the model has its advantages. The errors in the confusion matrix
(Figure 5.5.6) can be used in a model uncertainty parameter. This parameter
not only helps represent the uncertainty in the classification model but also that
in the FEM modelling strategy. Though great care has been exercised in
modelling the behaviour of the façades, uncertainties about the soil-structure
interface strategy, the application of the displacement, the choice in material
model and soil profiles, and some of the values assumed for the models for
instance, will impact the final probability in a way which would difficult to
quantify. The uncertainty parameter derived from the confusion matrix can help
represent these effects.

202

Chapter 5

example, is linked to a 30% probability of large openings. A smaller opening
ratio will be less likely to contain large openings. While it was considered to
remove the predictor of large openings, re-evaluating the model without it led
to a 3% decrease in accuracy, hence all seven predictors were kept.
For the settlement shapes, damage cases are investigated from literature (Van
Staalduinen et al. 2018, Prosperi et al. [20]). Four different shapes were
included in the FEM models; all are hogging-based shapes which are more
damaging to buildings and thus appear more frequently in damage reports.
However, the symmetric hogging is less likely (42 vs 58%) and the knick points
involve most of the deformation (located at half and third being thus more
likely). Yet, these are correlated to the length of the façades. Longer façades
are more likely to have shapes only affected at their corners (at a fourth or a
fifth of the length). Hence, for façades with length larger than the mean length,
shorter knick points are twice as likely while for shorter façades they are half as
likely. This precise distribution is an assumption from the empirical
observations. The relative material strength follows a normal distribution with a
30% variation; see section 5.2.
Two soil profiles were investigated: the sandy soil A and the peaty profile B.
The micro-zonation study of Kruiver et al. (2017), was used to determine which
was more likely on the province scale. It follows that the sandy soil appears in
60% of the cases and the peaty soil in the remaining 40%. This also follows into
a binary distribution. The normal stiffness of the interface representing the soil
is also affected. Three possibilities were studied: low, original and high normal
stiffness. For soil A, the stiffer option is more likely with a distribution of
0.7:1.0:1.5 (L:O:H); while for soil B, the lower options becomes more likely with
the inverse assignments (1.5:1.0:0.7). The exact values are somewhat arbitrary
but corresponds to the weights assigned in [27].
Finally, the parameter with the most influence in the classification model is the
angular distortion. For this, no distribution is assumed since this is the hazard
intensity parameter. Instead, the values are varied between 1·10-5 and 0.01 (or
1/100) and the probability of damage is determined based on a simulation with
a million samples per value of β. The probability of reaching or exceeding
various values of Ψ is then determined based on the number of models that
exceed those values at the ordinal βs. The result is plotted as fragility curves in
Figure 5.5.7. One can observe their characteristic S-shape. However, especially
the curve for Ψ=1, does not start from the origin but at a higher probability.
This is explained by some models that already start with some degree of
damage due to gravity effects. This could be addressed by considering the
∆Ψ, but that conveys other issues when the geometries of the façades differ. At

Fragility

203

the right side of the curves, one can also see that the probabilities do not reach
1 at the high values of β investigated. This is particularly clear in the bottom
figure for geometries with L/H smaller than 1.5.

Predictor

Symbol

Distribution

Parameters /
Formulation

Units /
Values

Length

L

LogNormal

µ=1.482, σ=0.677

m

Height

H

LogNormal

µ=1.282, σ=0.428

m

Opening Ratio

OR

LogNormal

µ=-1.51, σ=0.342

-

Large Openings

OT

Uniform
Correlated

p(true)=OR

true; false

Settlement Shape

Aβ

Uniform

p(AS)=0.58

AS; S
(symmetric)

Knick Location

pk

Uniform
Correlated

p(E | L> Ł)=2/3
p(C | L> Ł)=1/3

E (edge); C
(centre)

Soil Profile

S

Uniform

p(A)=0.6

Soil A; Soil B

Interface Normal
Stiffness

kn

Uniform
Correlated

p(L | S=A)=0.22
p(L | S=B)=0.47
p(H | S=A)=0.47
p(H | S=B)=0.22

L; O; H (high)

Relative Material
Strength

m

Normal

µ=1, σ=0.3

-

Angular Distortion

βA

Fragility
Parameter

10-5 … 10-1

rad

Chapter 5

Table 5.5.2. Predictors and distributions assumed. Ł is the mean of L.

204

Chapter 5

0.7
Final

Exceedance Probability

0.6
0.5

=1
=1.5
=2
=2.5
=3

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
10-5

10-4

10-3

10-2

10-1

Applied Angular Distortion A

1
Final

0.9

Exceedance Probability

0.8
0.7
0.6

=1
=2
=3
L/H 2.5
1.5 L/H < 2.5
L/H < 1.5

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-5
10

10

-4

-3

10

-2

10

-1

10

Applied Angular Distortion A

Figure 5.5.7. Fragility curves for soil angular distortion β. Bottom, segregated by L/H
ratio.

Indeed, the curves are also plotted distinguishing between long façades, for
which the L/H is larger than 2.5, and short or slender façades. Besides the
angular distortion, this is the most influential parameter, clearly demonstrated
by the significantly higher probability of damage of the longer façades. This
makes sense since an equal value of angular distortion with lead to higher
differential settlements on a longer façade. If the façade is not very tall, it acts
as a slender beam subjected to high deformations. This leads to large tensile
stresses at the top of the façades (for hogging), which results in cracks. The

Fragility

205

geometries with a low L/H ratio instead, even if subjected to larger angular
distortions, are sufficiently stiff and do not deform under their own weight and
associated vertical loads.
The fragility curves are fitted with a log-normal distribution as in Section 5.4.
This eliminates the abnormal effects at the tails of the curves and makes them
more comparable to others in literature. In particular, earlier work employed
the same model results to draw weighted exceedance curves where the
number of model results were counted and their count weighted with their
likelihood or appearing in real distributions. This comparison is conducted in
Figure 5.5.8 for the range of β between 1/10000 (10-4) and 1/100 (10-2)
between the sets of log-normal curves. The reference value of 1/500, used to
evaluate if buildings are sensitive to angular distortions is also highlighted for
the comparison. At this value, the curves are well comparable. For larger
distortions, the weighted exceedance lines display larger probabilities. This is
due to the geometries employed. The weighted approach attempts to weigh
the number of models so that the distribution of geometries match the
distributions of Length and Height observed from the 3D·BAG database which
are represented by lognormal distributions. Neither weight matching nor lognormalisation are perfect (especially for the Height) which makes the weighted
approach, with its purposely vulnerable geometries, more conservative.
0.7

Exceedance Probability

0.5
0.4

Chapter 5

Final

0.6

=1
=1.5
=2
=2.5
=3
Weighted Exceedance
Simulated
=1/500
A

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-4
10

-3

10

-2

10

Applied Angular Distortion A

Figure 5.5.8. Comparison of fragility curves against weighted exceedance curves from
[27].

206

Chapter 5

Conclusion
The fragility curves for quasi-static soil movements are another example of
crack-based damage probabilities for masonry buildings. The set of curves,
determined for soil deformations in terms of curvatures with negligible
horizontal strains expressed as angular distortion, β, give the probability of
light damage in the damage scale of the parameter Ψ. The relationship β-Ψ
can help establish the initial condition of buildings when subsequently
subjected to vibrations.

5.6. Conclusions: Probability of Damage and Aggravation
In this study, a five-step process was employed to quantify the likelihood of
light damage, characterised as visible cracks of at least 0.1 mm, in bare, firedclay-brick masonry walls. Initially, wall experiments calibrated nonlinear FE
models, focusing on crack behaviour, and these models were then extrapolated
to assess the dynamic impact of seismic vibrations on crack initiation and
propagation, including cases with pre-existing micro-cracks or invisible damage
from differential settlements.
The study revealed quantifiable relationships between damage intensity and
various factors like material strength, pre-damage condition, soil type, and
Peak Ground Velocity (PGV). For instance, it was found that weaker masonry
materials saw larger damage increases, with models on peat (soft soil) accruing
33% more damage than those on stiffer sandy soil, and walls with windows
experiencing 25% more damage than those without. Additionally, walls
undergoing two consecutive seismic events showed an average of 10% more
damage than those subjected to a single event. The final step involved
creating a set of 'fragility or vulnerability curves', that present the probability of
exceeding a value of Ψ given an initial condition Ψ0. These curves
demonstrated for example, that walls with no pre-damage (Ψ0=0) had a 5%
chance of light damage at a PGV of 10 mm/s, a probability that rose to 20% if
the walls had some undetectable pre-existing damage (Ψ0=0.5). A lower PGV
would be associated with a lower probability of damage; for instance, at 5 mm/
s, the probability of exceeding Ψ≥1 when Ψ0=0.5 is 6% and for exceeding
Ψ≥2, it is below 0.1%.
While the fragility curves determined herein are specific to the situation in the
north of the Netherlands and are constrained by certain limitations such as the
type of masonry and structural geometry, the reduced number of earthquake
motions, and the type of pre-damage selected; the methodological approach
employed comprising FE calibration, extrapolation, and probabilistic extension,
can be used in other situations to determine the probability of light damage.

Fragility

207

Indeed, in addition to the light damage fragility for seismic vibrations, this
chapter presents a comprehensive analysis of the relationship between soil
angular distortion and the fragility of masonry façades, contributing to the
understanding of static soil movement impacts on structural integrity. By
employing a combination of finite element modelling and data analysis
techniques, including machine learning, the research provides a nuanced
perspective on the susceptibility of various façade geometries and material
compositions to soil-induced damages.

Furthermore, the use of a classification neural network to predict damage
levels marks a significant methodological advancement. Despite some inherent
limitations and uncertainties, this model serves as a powerful tool for
estimating the likelihood of masonry wall damage under various conditions.
The study's findings are further strengthened by the incorporation of realistic
probabilistic distributions for key parameters, ensuring that the model
outcomes mirror real-world scenarios. The fragility curves exhibit the
characteristic S-shape, providing clear insights into the damage probability at
different levels of soil angular distortion. Notably, the study highlights the
critical influence of the length-over-height ratio on façade vulnerability, with
longer façades demonstrating a higher propensity for damage. This finding
underscores the importance of considering façade geometry in assessing
structural risk.
The conclusions can be further summed up:
Impact of Pre-existing Conditions: The analysis underscores the significant
role of pre-existing, undetectable damage in increasing seismic vulnerability.
Structures with prior damage exhibited a 20% increase in the probability of
light damage at a Peak Ground Velocity (PGV) of 10 mm/s, compared to a 5%
probability for structures with no prior damage. This highlights the necessity for
thorough pre-seismic assessments to accurately gauge vulnerability; a zero
measurement or in Dutch a “nulmeting”.
Material Properties and Damage Susceptibility: Weaker masonry materials
experienced a 33% greater increase in damage compared to stronger variants.

Chapter 5

The semi-coupled models developed in this work reveal the intricate interplay
between soil movements and masonry façade damage. By systematically
varying parameters such as material strength, soil profile, interface stiffness,
and displacement shapes, the study offers a detailed exploration of the factors
influencing façade vulnerability. This comprehensive approach, encompassing
over 15 thousand data points, enables the derivation of fragility curves that
effectively correlate soil angular distortion with damage probability.

208

Chapter 5

This insight is crucial for material selection and emphasises the need for
material-specific considerations in seismic risk assessments.
Influence of Geometric Variations: The study revealed that wall geometries
and façade types significantly affect damage susceptibility. For example, walls
with window openings were found to be 25% more vulnerable to seismicinduced damage than walls without openings, highlighting the importance of
considering architectural design in seismic resilience planning. Longer walls are
more susceptible to settlement-induced damage.
Seismic Risk Management Applications: The study contributes fragility curves
that correlate PGV with the probability of light damage. These curves can be
instrumental for seismic damage assessment, providing a more nuanced
understanding of damage probabilities under varying seismic intensities. These
can be further employed in risk management decision support.

209

Chapter 6
Hastening:
Damage Accumulation Function
The effect of repetition when considering damage to masonry structures is
exhaustively investigated in this final chapter. A lengthened introduction details
the motivations and the layout of the chapter. The section considers new
insights developed upon earlier work [17, 23, 24]; see List of Publications.

hasten | ˈheɪsn |

Chapter 6

verb [no object, with infinitive]
be quick to do something: he hastened to refute the assertion.
• [with adverbial of direction] move or travel hurriedly: we hastened back to Paris.
• [with object] cause (something, especially something undesirable) to happen sooner
than it otherwise would: this tragedy probably hastened his own death from heart
disease.
[Oxford Dictionary of English]
· the earthquakes hastened the inevitable damage on that poorly-built house.
[Own Example]

210

Chapter 6

Chapter 6: Table of Contents
6.1. Analysis of Repetition Effect in Experiments

212

6.2. Damage Accumulation due to Repetition in FEM Models
218
6.2.1. Methodology: Brief Description of the FE Models ...........................218
6.2.2. Variations investigated with the FE Models ......................................221
6.2.3. Model Results: Effect of Repetition ..................................................223
6.2.3. Summary of Observations from Repetitions Models ........................228
6.3. Damage Accumulation Function (DAF)
229
6.3.1. Function for Ψ from Variable PGV Sequences ..................................229
6.3.2. Comparison of DAF against Model Results ......................................235
6.3.3. Comparison of DAF against Experimental Results ...........................241
6.3.4. Application: Probability Maps for Accumulated Damage ................244
6.4. Concept of Damage Hastening
248
6.4.1. Definition of ‘Hastening’ in the Context of Damage ........................249
6.4.2. Time as the Hazard ...........................................................................252

Prologue
Repeated vibrations may cause an accumulation of damage. The experiments
of Chapter 3 have shown that cyclic loading, or repeated loading without a
reversal in direction, leads to a degradation of the masonry and an increase in
visible crack-based damage. As in the experiments, masonry structures are
exposed to repeated loading from several sources such as wind, gravity
loading/unloading, temperature variations, seasonal soil changes, and
vibrations, among many others. See earlier Chapter 4 for a more extensive
overview of loads on masonry buildings.
The goal of this work is to assess the effect from vibrations, in particular, from
repeated vibrations. These may come from several sources, such as
construction or industrial activities, traffic, or seismicity, though the focus is
placed on the latter source.
Often, repeated iterations of the same load are similar. Construction activities,
for instance, could be caused by machinery operating at a certain load and at a
specific distance from neighbouring structures, which would to similar
repetitions. In other cases, like for traffic vibrations, only the larger events have
an influence on structures. For example, larger trucks driving by a house would
trigger vibrations in the structure while passenger vehicles would have no
effect. In this case, most of the larger vibrations are again similar.

Damage Accumulation Function

211

In the case of seismic vibrations, however, repeated events could be markedly
different and all types of events could have a damaging influence on masonry
structures. Figure 6.0 presents the peak ground velocity in the town of
Loppersum considering events with an intensity of at least 2 mm/s. Two
observations can be made from this figure. First, that in the past two decades,
structures in the exemplified city have been subjected to more than 30 relevant
events. Second, that the events have varied significantly in their intensity, with
many events more than five times more intense than the smaller ones.
This means that when evaluating the effects of repetition, one must also
consider that the repetitions might have varying intensities. And, unlike during
the experiments on masonry walls, the intensity of the repetitions will not be
gradually increasing but mark a random sequence of alternating events.
This chapter begins with an analysis of the effects of repetition on the
experiments on walls and spandrels in Section 6.1; this is a more in-depth
examination that continues the analysis of Chapter 3. This is followed by an
exploration of repetition effects on the extrapolated finite-element-method
models of Chapter 5. These models, calibrated on the experiments, were
subjected to repeated earthquake records via non-linear time-history analyses.
The increase in damage because of the repeated records is then examined in
Section 6.2.

Finally, the chapter coins the concept of ‘damage hastening’ in Section 6.4.
This concept acknowledges that building damage is a continuous process
which might be exacerbated by singular (repeated) events. Over time, this
aggravation leads to the need for earlier (maintenance) interventions. It also
means that damage will be earlier visible. Moreover, the influence of a hazard
can be quantified by its hastening of damage. Similarly, this section places time
on the hazard axis: the longer a structure is exposed to seismicity, the higher
the probability of damage. For this case, various idealised seismicity scenarios
are evaluated. This approach could be employed for other hazards, too, like
distinct policies on water level management. These notions are explored in this
last section of this work.
The town “Loppersum" is used as an example for a location in this Chapter. It
is located close to the centre of the region and was exposed to many of the

Chapter 6

Next, the chapter delves into a proposal for a formulation that enables
computing the (probability of) damage and its increase for a sequence of
earthquake events, just like the one illustrated in Figure 6.0. This formulation is
validated by contrasting its results against the repetition effect in the
experiments and in the FEM models. This is elaborated in Section 6.3.

212

Chapter 6

large events, though other smaller towns display an overall higher probability
of damage; see later Section 6.3.4. A visit to Loppersum is narrated in
Appendix E with a different perspective on the town.

Figure 6.0. A sequence of Peak Ground Velocity with values corresponding to the 75%
percentile (a 25% probability of exceedance) determined with Ground Motion
Prediction Equations of Bommer et al. (2019) at the city of Loppersum in the centre of
the Groningen region.

6.1. Analysis of Repetition Effect in Experiments
The experiments on walls and spandrels, presented in Chapter 3, were
designed, among several goals, to assess the effect of repetition on the
behaviour of the masonry. For this purpose, identical displacements were
repeatedly applied to the specimens. In the case of the walls, the in-plane drift
was increased from zero to a specific amplitude and then back to zero. This was
repeated without reversing the orientation of the drift with the intention of
focusing on a single effect. Later in the test, two-way cycles were also applied.
Repeated displacements were observed to be associated with a reduction in
the force required to achieve the displacement. This was identified as a force
degradation. Initially, spandrels were used to investigate whether this effect
continued indefinitely or whether it would stabilise after a number of
repetitions leading to an asymptotic force degradation. A large number of
spandrels could be more easily tested. Variants with ten, fifteen, thirty, and one
hundred identical repetitions per displacement amplitude were explored; see
Figure 6.1.1. where force data from the spandrels tested with repetitions is
pooled in a single graph.

Damage Accumulation Function

213

It was observed that thirty repetitions were sufficient to reach a stabilised force
degradation. Walls were tested with thirty and fifty repetition variants, and
thirty was again confirmed to be sufficient to observe the effect. Consequently,
most tests were consistently conducted with thirty repetitions to ensure
comparability and reduce the quasi-static tests’ durations.
8
7
6

Step

5
4
3
2
1
0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

100

Repetitions

In the figure, every increase in displacement is noted as an additional step. In
some cases, eight increases (8x15) were performed. For later steps, the
degradation is about twice (proportionally) than for earlier steps. However,
steps with a large number of repetitions, also saw a larger degradation at later
steps. Except for a single case, all examples show a reduction in force as
displacements are repeated.
The effect of force degradation is further illustrated in Figure 6.1.2 for the case
of the full-scale walls. Here, in-plane lateral drift is enforced repeatedly, first in
one direction, and then in two-way cyclic tests. Only the wall tested with the
repetitive and cyclic protocols and surveyed with the high-resolution DIC
system are collected. Nonetheless, thirteen walls show decreases in force when
drifts were repeated.

Chapter 6

Figure 6.1.1. Force degradation for the spandrels segregated by step. Different lines are
used only to distinguish overlapping instances; style and colour have no legend.
Chapter 3.

214

Chapter 6
Steps

52
48
44
40
20

36
32

Force* in kN

Positive
Force in kN

25

28

15

24
20
-52
Walls
Comp41
Comp42
Comp43
Comp45
Comp46
Comp49
Comp50

-20

-48
Comp51
Comp52
Comp54
Comp56
Comp53*
Comp55*

-44
-40
-36
-32

Force* in kN

Negative
Force in kN

-25

-28

-15

-24
1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

-20

Cycle

Figure 6.1.2. Force degradation for walls positive, cyclic.

These values are quantified in Table 6.1.1. The degradation is measured by
fitting a straight line to every step. Then, the slope of the line is linked to the
average decrease in force during every step expressed as Newtons per
repetition. In some cases, the slopes are positive indicating an increase. The
median values for every wall during the repetitive, positive cyclic and negative
cyclic are calculated. This reveals that little degradation occurs for positive
loading during the cyclic portion of the tests. However, the degradation during
the repetitive part and the negative drift are similar. This is reasonable, since
the positive direction during cyclic loading was already damaged during the
repetitive part. Indeed, while a large variation is present in the values, the
resulting averages for the three categories are similar.
Table 1 also includes the median values between all the walls for a given step.
Here, one can observe that the sixth and seventh steps during cyclic positive
loading do lead a force reduction in comparison to the earlier five steps; this is
likely because these steps enforce a larger drift than what was tested during
the repetitive protocol.

Damage Accumulation Function

215

Median N/rep

Walls

Repetitiv
e
Comp41
NA

Cyclic +

Cyclic -

-6.8

0.5

Comp42

NA

-12.1

-17.1

Comp43

NA

-3.9

-4.0

Comp45

-21.7

0.7

-10.9

Comp46

-17.9

-0.5

-21.2

Comp49

-16.8

0.1

-34.2

Comp50

-24.6

-13.2

-22.3

Comp51

-15.7

-7.2

-24.8

Comp52

-16.5

3.7

-16.2

Comp53

-50.8

3.4

-46.3

Comp54

-24.6

NA

NA

Comp55

-25.6

2.5

-56.8

Comp56

-17.4

-7.7

-18.6

Median

-23.8

-3.9

-21.9

Protocol /
Direction

Repetitive

Cyclic
Positive

Cyclic
Negative

Median

Step

Median N/rep

1

-20.1

2

-24.6

3

-25.6

4

-21.6

5

-19.5

1

11.7

2

-1.0

3

-2.2

4

0.1

5

-9.5

6

-11.6

7

-12.2

1

-34.7

2

-25.6

3

-24.5

4

-18.6

5

-16.1

6

-12.0

7

-9.8

Repetitive

-23.8

Cyclic +

-3.9

Cyclic -

-21.9

Since identical displacements were applied in each step, cracks were expected
to remain unchanged within a step, with the effect of the damage
concentrating in the reduction in force. The degradation of force at equal drift
could be compared to the increase of displacement at equal force, a situation
more analogous to a repeated dynamic excitation. However, repeating an
identical force is experimentally challenging. Nonetheless, at later steps, even
during identical values of drift, cracks grew both in width and in length. This
was especially true during two-way cyclic steps where the reversal of the load
seems to have caused local damage within the crack interface. Figure 6.1.3
demonstrates this for a horizontal crack in a wall. See also similar figures for
other walls in Chapter 3. Here, some of the cracks increase considerably in
width even within steps; this is then linked to an increase in Ψ. This means that

Chapter 6

Table 6.1.1. Left, median slope from the various steps in the repetitive and cyclic
protocols for each wall. Right, median slope from the various walls for each step. The
slope is expressed in Newtons per repetition; a negative slope indicates a decrease in
force. See Figure 6.1.1.

216

Chapter 6

repeated effects are not only expressed as a force degradation in the
experiments but also lead to a direct increase in measurable damage.
Cycle 106

Cycle 134

Cycle 171

Cycle 204

1

1000

Comp46

0.5

500

Highlighted Cycles
Width
Length

0
0

30

60

90

120

150

180

210

0
240

Crack Length in mm

Crack Width in mm

Cycle 41

Cycles

Figure 6.1.3. Progression of crack width and length for a selected crack of Comp46. See
also Figures 3.1.7 and 3.2.8.

The evolution of Ψ, as measured by the cracks identified with the DIC system,
is presented in Figure 6.1.4 in a way similar to that of Figure 6.1.2. In this case,
the increase in Ψ over the steps can be observed. This increase is not as
consistent as the decrease in force. In some cases, Ψ appears to decrease or is
noisy. This is because of the several steps involved between the actual cracks
appearing on the masonry and the expression of Ψ. Unlike the force, which is
measured directly; cracks are inferred from the displacement field of the wall.
This field in turn, is extracted from the correlation of pixels in a pair of digital
images which are captured by a camera. The crack width and length are
computed from the displacement field, which also carries uncertainties. Under
these limitations, it is remarkable that the small, general trend of increasing Ψ
within the steps can be observed.
The spandrels were controlled with the crack mouth opening displacement and
thus showed a proportionally large degradation in force. The walls, controlled
by in-plane drift, saw both a reduction in force and an increase in damage. It
follows that if identical forces were repeatedly applied, a larger increase in
crack-based damage would be expected. A hybrid force-displacement control
system for new experiments could be designed to test this hypothesis.

Damage Accumulation Function

217
Steps

3.5

(Psi)
Positive Drift

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
3.5
Walls

(Psi)
Negative Drift

3

Comp41
Comp42
Comp43
Comp45
Comp46
Comp49
Comp50

2.5
2
1.5

Comp51
Comp52
Comp53
Comp54
Comp55
Comp56

1
0.5

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Cycle

The experiments demonstrate an increase in damage during repeated loading.
For actions such as temperature variations, for which identical displacements
are enforced over regular daily or seasonal cycles, this observation can be
directly applied. Other actions, like differential settlements, can also lead to
cyclic displacements when the causes are linked to changes in the ground
water table or seasonal patterns of underground (gas) storage.
For dynamic actions, the observations based on repeated displacements can
only be adopted qualitatively since dynamic actions are associated with a
repetition in (inertial force) which, if leading to damage, can then be associated
with a varying displacement amplitude. The effect of repetition is thus better
evaluated with numerical models calibrated on the experiments; see next
section.

Chapter 6

Figure 6.1.4. Evolution of Ψ over the repetitive and cyclic wall experiments.

218

Chapter 6

6.2. Damage Accumulation due to Repetition in FEM Models
The aim of this section is to explore the effect of repeated earthquake
vibrations via the use of non-linear finite element models previously calibrated
against experiments on masonry walls. The objective is to quantify the effect of
multiple repeated events and observe which combinations are most influential
for the progression of damage. The study looks at damage on bare, fired-clay
brick masonry walls without finishing; window frames are not included and
connections at the ends of the walls are approximated while connections with
the floors are not represented. The effect of repeated acceleration signals is
presented.

6.2.1. Methodology: Brief Description of the FE Models
Models of masonry walls, as a proxy of masonry structures, are used to analyse
a multitude of parameters and their influence on the final damage. The models
have been calibrated against experiments (Chapter 3) and validated against
further tests (Chapter 4). A main strategy, consisting of experiments, calibrated
models, and extrapolation models, is used to explore the effect of earthquake
vibrations in several previous publications [1,2,3,4]. The damage contemplated
is crack based and measured predominantly by the width of the cracks using
the damage parameter, Ψ; see Chapter 2.
Figure 6.2.1 depicts the two geometries of the finite-element models. They
consist of 100 mm thick, fired-clay-brick masonry walls 3.10 m tall and 2.70 m
high, one with an opening for a window placed asymmetrically and another
without openings, both sporting a mesh of 50x50 mm plane-stress, and 8-node
quadratic elements with a 3x3 Gaussian integration scheme. The elements
were assigned the Engineering Masonry Model for DIANA FEA, an orthotropic
non-linear material model which includes different properties for the two
directions for both elastic and inelastic behaviour: tensile cracking with
softening and secant nonlinear unloading/reloading behaviour, Coulomb
friction with cohesion softening and elastic unloading/reloading, and
compression crushing (in both horizontal and vertical directions) with mixed
secant/elastic unloading and reloading (Schreppers et al. 2017, Rots et al.
2016). This material model, purposely developed to depict the inelastic
behaviour of masonry, is key when assessing the accumulation of damage.
However, the material degradation observed in the experiments as a force
reduction (see Section 6.1) is not implemented. This is discussed by
Bindiganavile-Ramadas (2018), where the EMM is expanded to account for the
repeated degradation. Yet, this model has not been validated for NLTHA.

Damage Accumulation Function

219

The models include an interface at their base to simulate the local soil-structure
interaction. The interface is provided with springs and dampers which simulate
the presence of the soil around the foundation of the structure following the
methodology proposed by Gazetas (1991), adapted from NEHRP (2012) and
further explored in Longo et al. (2021). The boundary interface does not allow
tension so that applying a settlement shape does not pull on the masonry and
allows it to deform freely instead. The masonry elements are assigned 2% of
Rayleigh damping based on the first two modes. Additionally, a line mass of
10,000 kg at the top, represents the dynamic effect of floors and transversal
walls experienced by the walls if they were part of a structure; similarly, an
overburden of 0.12 MPa is applied as a gravity load.
a.
Geometry A

Geometry B

b.

c.

The effect of transversal walls was also included in the same manner as in the
parallel study focused on settlement deformations [27], namely with linearelastic beam elements placed vertically on the sides of the walls and simulating
the stiffness of a flange connected via the corners to the modelled walls,
typical for Dutch masonry buildings before 1970.
The models included three phases: first, the gravity load was evaluated for
which no cracking strains were observed. Secondly, a settlement deformation
was applied underneath the boundary interface which led to small cracks in the
walls depending on the intensity of the applied profile, for some walls no predamage was generated; see next section. Thirdly, sliding at the interface was
locked, the displacement field of the wall was cleared but cracking strains were
retained, and a time-history analysis was performed in which the acceleration
time series of four distinct earthquake records was evaluated (in different
models). The settlement shape and earthquake records, also employed in other
chapters of this work, are detailed in Figure 2. To adequately represent the
record-to-record variability of the earthquake vibrations, four records from two

Chapter 6

Figure 6.2.1. Two geometries of the FEM model. a) Mass from the roof, b) effect of
lateral walls, c) local soil-structure interaction.

220

Chapter 6

Normalized Amplitude

events were selected. By employing recordings registered near and far from
the epicentres, with both horizontal and vertical components, additional
variability is introduced as the records are clearly distinguished by their number
of effective cycles and frequency content.
Shape of Settlement Profile

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

Zeerijp 2018
Normalized Sa

Zeerijp 2018
Normalized PGV

Horizontal Coordinate in mm

4

6

8

10

12

14

Westerwijtwerd 2019
Normalized PGV

Time in seconds

2

4

6

8

10

Time in seconds

10-2

10-1

100

Period in seconds

12

14

Westerwijtwerd 2019
Normalized Sa

2

Far 7.5km
Near 2.5km

10-2

Far 9.7km
Near 3.2km

10-1

100

Period in seconds

Figure 6.2.2. Top, settlement shape for the pre-damage scenarios. Bottom four,
horizontal components of the normalised velocity time series corresponding to two
events, each recorded at two different stations, near and far to their respective
epicentres and, the normalised spectral acceleration of the signals. Normalised graphs
are valueless and show shape and comparison between records.

Damage Accumulation Function

221

6.2.2. Variations investigated with the FE Models
A large number of variations were automatically set to run to investigate the
influence of: the two geometries presented, the material strength, the intensity
of the initial pre-damage, the stiffness of the soil-structure interface, the type of
earthquake record, the intensity of the vibration, and the number of repeated
vibrations.

Chapter 6

In particular, two distinct batches of models can be identified. One where the
intensity of the vibrations was always identical, so a sequence of two, four or
eight times the same acceleration signal amplified to the same PGV was
evaluated in the model. This allowed for a more direct comparison to the
experimental results, where identical values of drift were applied to masonry
walls, and for a more precise evaluation of the repetition, where only one factor
was being varied in the analyses. For the second batch of heterogeneous
models, the PGV was varied to analyse the effect of a small vibration following
a large vibration or vice versa. These two batches are herein referred to as the
homogenous and heterogenous sequences, respectively. Table 6.2 summarises
the potential variations; the number of permutations is about three thousand.

Chapter 6
222

Soil Type

Sandy clay
(stiff)
Peaty clay
(soft)

Weak material

Material Strength

no damage

Ψ0=0

Initial damage

ft=0.11 MPA
Gf=5.6 N/m

Earthquake event

Zeerijp Far

Zeerijp Near
cw < 0.1 mm

Westerwijtwerd Near

invisible damage

Ψ0=1.0

E=3570 MPa
barely visible damage

Ψ0=1.5

Westerwijtwerd Far

Gf=11 N/m

visible damage

Strong material
ft=0.21 MPA

E=5100 MPa

cw ≈ 0.5 mm

cw ≈ 0.1 mm

ft=0.16 MPA

Standard material

Ψ0=0.5

E=2750 MPa

32 mm/s (2x, 4x, 8x)

16 mm/s (1x, 2x, 4x, 8x)

8 mm/s (1x, 2x, 4x)

4 mm/s (2x, 4x, 8x)

2 mm/s (2x, 4x, 8x)

PGV homogeneous

2x32 mm/s + 1x16 mm/s

2x16 mm/s + 1x32 mm/s

2x16 mm/s + 1x8 mm/s

2x16 mm/s + 1x4 mm/s

2x8 mm/s + 1x16 mm/s

1x32 mm/s + 1x16 mm/s

1x16 mm/s + 1x32 mm/s

1x16 mm/s + 1x8 mm/s

1x8 mm/s + 1x16 mm/s

1x16 mm/s + 1x4 mm/s

PGV heterogeneous

Table 6.2. Possible parameter combinations explored with the FEM models. About three thousand permutations possible. For additional
material properties, see Korswagen et al. (2022). Cw: crack width.
Wall geometry

Flexible with window
opening
T=0.12 s
Stiff without opening
T=0.07 s

Gf=19 N/m

Damage Accumulation Function

223

6.2.3. Model Results: Effect of Repetition

Chapter 6

The results of the individual models have been discussed earlier; here, only a
few cases are highlighted instead. Figure 6.2.3 details the initial damage
condition of a wall; the cracks were created by allowing the wall to settle under
the gravity load and the deformed lower boundary of the supporting interface.
The settlement shape was modified such that the initial damage fell into one of
the three categories listed in Table 6.2. The cracks are relatively small,
pertaining to light damage, and are then aggravated in both width and length
by the subsequent vibrations applied during the following time-history phase.
In this example, the opening for a window causes stresses to localise and
cracks to appear around the opening. Bending in the bottom spandrel results
in a vertical crack, common for settlement-based damage observed in damage
reports (Van Staalduinen et al., 2018). At the top corner of the window, a
vertical-diagonal cracks also appears. Also in Figure 3, the case of cracks
during the earthquake motion is depicted. The lateral loading produces a
diagonal crack in the body of the wall (example without an opening) and small
rocking or flexure cracks at the edges.

FigureFigure
3. Example
two model
(wall
with a window,
top,
without,
for the initial
6.2.3.ofExample
of variations
two model
variations
(wall with
a and
window,
top,bottom)
and without,
condition
before
phasebefore
(top), and
earthquake
motion
showing
the crack
bottom)
for the
the earthquake
initial condition
theafter
earthquake
phase,
top,(bottom)
and after
earthquake
width motion,
from the bottom.
FEM model,
left,
and
the
automatically-processed
damage
evaluation,
right.
Crackwidth
Showing the cracking from the FEM model, left, crack width per
belowand
0.01right,
mm are
Shear crack width
(Ecw3)evaluation.
is included Widths
but not below
shown.0.01
element,
the excluded;
automatically-processed
damage

Severalmm
interesting
observations
were
drawn
from
the pooled
results.
For example, the weaker
are excluded;
shear crack
width
(Ecw3)
is included
but not
shown.
masonry material led to a larger damage increase in comparison to the stronger materials. Also
intuitively, the larger PGV caused greater damage. In contrast, the softer soil resulted in slightly
less damage since it offered more damping; note that the PGV value is fixed in these comparisons,
so the amplification typically associated with soft soils is not included. Similarly, the higher the
value of pre-damage, the larger the final damage, yet the increase in damage diminished as the

224

Chapter 6

The results were automatically processed to recognise the individual cracks and
the intensity of the damage. Then, the difference between the initial damage
and the final damage (∆Ψ) was quantified for each model.
Several interesting observations were drawn from the pooled results. For
example, the weaker masonry material led to a larger damage increase in
comparison to the stronger materials. Also intuitively, the larger PGV caused
greater damage. In contrast, the softer soil resulted in slightly less damage
since it offered more damping; note that the PGV value is fixed in these
comparisons, so the amplification typically associated with soft soils is not
included. Similarly, the higher the value of pre-damage, the larger the final
damage, yet the increase in damage diminished as the initial damage
increased. Regardless of wall material or soil type, the settlement was adjusted
to achieve specific values of initial damage; consequently, the effect of
individual parameters could be assessed. Additionally, the more flexible wall
displayed more damage for earthquakes recorded nearby the epicentre, while
the rigid wall was more vulnerable to the records registered far from the
epicentre. These observations have been discussed in depth in Chapter 5.

Figure 6.2.4. Mean increase in damage (∆Ψ) and quantile range of 25-75% (shaded) for
the models with homogeneous sequences of PGV. Left, for relatively small values of
PGV, 2, 4 and 8 mm/s; and right, for values of 16 and 32 mm/s. Note that the vertical
scales differ by a factor 2 and that the centreline corresponds to the average (mean) and
the shaded areas to percentiles. See Figure 5.2.4.

Instead, the focus of this section is on the effect of the repeated vibrations.
Figure 6.2.4 presents a first look into the results where all models have been
pooled together and only segregated by PGV and number of repeated events.
Since pre-damage has an effect on the progression of damage caused by
earthquakes, the absolute damage increase between the initial damage and
the final damage after all events were evaluated is shown on the vertical axes.
The graphs illustrate that a more intense PGV results in a larger increase of

Damage Accumulation Function

225

damage, with an event of 8 mm/s increasing the damage by 0.21 points on
average, while an event of 32 mm/s produces almost three times more
damage. Similarly, repeated events also lead to an increase in damage, but this
is dependent on the intensity of the vibration. For very small values of PGV, the
increase seems minimal, while the larger PGVs can lead to an average increase
of 10% for a second identical event. However, further repetitions seem to result
in ever smaller increases in damage. The figure also shows the quartiles
corresponding to the 25th and 75th percentiles. For low PGVs, many models
did not show any damage increase at all, for example; while for large values of
PGV, most models showed damage and the variability between models was
about twice as large than for the smaller PGV values.

The graph shows how larger events impart most to the increase in damage,
while a small event following a large event adds little damage. Moreover, the
greater number of events usually reduces the standard deviation in the results,
meaning the increase in damage becomes more uniform. In particular,
comparing the combinations of 2x8+1x16 and 2x16+1x8 shows that the final
damage is very similar, but in the first sequence most of the damage appears
during the last event, while in the second sequence the damage appears with
the first event and progresses sightly afterwards. This is better observed when
comparing the last two series of three records each; the sequence with 2x32
yields slightly larger damage.
Furthermore, the comparison of 1x16 against 1x16+1x4 for instance, proves
that the small event does have a small, yet measurable contribution to the final
damage. However, the median is skewed in the second case and appears to
show a much larger damage increase. Indeed, some results seem slightly
inconsistent. For example, in the combinations of 1x16+1x4 and 1x16+1x8, the
damage increase caused by both second events seems much alike even
though the latter combination has a larger PGV. Similarly, it can also be
observed that the quartile range of the sequences with heterogenous PGV
values is usually wider than that of the homogenous sequences. This means
that there is more variability between the distinct models pooled in these

Chapter 6

The results can be further dissected to compare the difference between the
homogeneous and heterogeneous sequences; this is realised in Figure 5. Here,
the two or three event sequences are decomposed into the earlier events; so,
the sequence of 2 times 16 mm/s followed by 1 time 8 mm/s (2x16+1x8) for
example, is the composition of 1x16, 2x16 and the entire sequence 2x16+1x8.
This compares the various events and shows which contributed most to the
final increase in damage.

226

Chapter 6

groups which in turn suggests that different models also respond differently to
the mixed PGV values.
To further improve these observations, additional model variations with
different geometries and sequences of PGV from more varied acceleration
records will need to be analysed. Moreover, observations from the field, where
cracks reported in earlier damage claims can be compared to subsequent
visits, will help validate the observations gathered in this modelling study.
The experiments on masonry walls show that repetition leads to degradation.
Unlike the models, where the excitation of the earthquakes leads to larger wall
drifts in each repetition, in the quasi-static experiments the in-plane wall drift is
repeated identically and the reduction in the strength and stiffness response of
the wall is measured. This reduction was observed to be highest at the second
repetition but stabilised after approximately 30 repetitions when the walls did
not lose additional stiffness nor strength. The experiments evidenced that
damage would increase slightly even when the enforced drift was identical.
This slight increase in damage and associated reduction in wall stiffness is
reflected in the results of the wall models; however, a direct, quantitative
comparison is difficult.

)
Damage Increase (

1x32
2x32
2x32+1x16

1x16
2x16
2x16+1x32

1x32+1x16

1x32

1x16+1x32

1x16

0

1x16
2x16
2x16+1x8

0

1x16
2x16
2x16+1x4

0.5

1x8
2x8
2x8+1x16

0.5

1x16+1x8

1

1x16

1

1x16+1x4

1.5

1x16

)

1.5

1x8+1x16

2

1x8

2

Damage Increase (

1x8+1x16 1x16+1x4 1x16+1x8 2x8+1x16 2x16+1x4 2x16+1x8 1x16+1x32 1x32+1x16 2x16+1x32 2x32+1x16

Figure 6.2.5. Box-plot with decomposed PGV sequences. The white ball indicates the
median, the box corresponds to the second and third quartiles and the lines (or
whiskers) correspond approximately to the interval defined by 2.5 times the standard
deviation.

The effect of the repetitions can be approximated by a power law dependent
on the number of repetitions and the intensity of the PGV. This is illustrated in

Damage Accumulation Function

227

Figure 6 where the increase in damage for subsequent repetitions has been
related to the increase caused by the first instance of the earthquake vibration.
The data points of the mean increase in damage are included and, while the
data is limited, the power law follows the general trend. This simple
formulation can then be used to estimate the contribution of subsequent
repeated events of similar intensity for any number and combination of peak
ground velocity values.
The fit of the power law seems inaccurate or insufficient. There are several
reasons for this. First, the function has been conceived using only two
parameters that are expected to have the most influence: the PGV and the
number of repetitions. But, there are other parameters that will have an
influence on the increase in damage such as the material strength or the
earthquake record. Secondly, the data points represent the mean of a pool of
model results segregated only by PGV and repetition. Yet, the number of
models evaluated for the various PGVs and repetitions is not the same. Lower
PGV values have been modelled more often thus introducing a bias to the
results of Figure 6. Finally, the number of models is limited and only permits
observing general trends. These shortfalls will be partly remedied in the
following section.
14%
Repetition 'n'

12%

8x
4x
2x

10%
8%

Chapter 6

6%
4%
2%
0%

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Peak Ground Velocity in mm/s 'pgv'

Figure 6.2.6. Additional damage expected for repetition of earthquake vibrations.
Approximate power law and mean sample points are shown.

228

Chapter 6

6.2.3. Summary of Observations from Repetitions Models
This study has employed non-linear finite-element models to quantify in-plane,
light, crack-based damage in bare masonry walls and investigate its sensitivity
towards repeated vibrations. Time history analyses with one or multiple
earthquake time series, amplified to identical or varying intensities, were used
to evaluate the influence of these repeated events. It was observed that,
• repeated events do lead to an accumulation in damage, albeit in small
quantities,
• vibrations of lower intensity than previous vibrations increase damage
negligibly, while
• vibrations of similar or larger intensity than previous vibrations may increase
damage by 10%, though this is dependent on the intensity of the vibrations
and the number of repetitions.
• For a second vibration of 10 mm/s for example, damage is expected to
increase by 6%.
• The limited number of models and variations, and lack of comparison field
data, should be further expanded to validate these model-based
observations.

Damage Accumulation Function

229

6.3. Damage Accumulation Function (DAF)
The goal of this section is to elaborate a procedure using the surrogate
function of Chapter 5 to predict the increase in damage even for sequences of
varying PGV values. The models of Section 6.2 provide a background for
validation of this function against homogenous and heterogeneous sequences
of PGV. Additional validation is provided by the experimental results of Section
6.1. These help tackle some of the limitations of the models. For example, the
capacity of the models to describe the degradation observed in the
experiments is limited because of the lack of explicit degradation in the
material model. Contrasting the Damage Accumulation Function (DAF) against
the experiments helps to verify that the effect of repetition is correctly
captured.
The DAF is then used to analyse real, historic sequences of seismic events
expressed as PGV histories.

6.3.1. Function for Ψ from Variable PGV Sequences
In Section 5.3, a function for estimating damage was formulated in the form:

ΨF = Ψ0 + ΔΨ( ∼ ) + ϵ(V )

Equation 6.1.

Ψ = f (Ψ0 | V | ∼ )

Equation 6.2.

One of the variables that is not evaluated in the model of Chapter 5 is the
number of repetitions of the earthquake “N” (see Equation 5.3). While N
appears in the formulation, for the subsequent analyses it was assumed to be
N=1. For the DAF however, N must be any natural number:

Ψ = f (Ψ0 | V | N | ∼ )

Equation 6.3.

Yet, with this formulation, the PGV would adopt a single value, thus forming a
homogenous sequence of PGV. Real PGV histories are rarely homogeneous, so
a new formulation is required: this is the Damage Accumulation Function.

Chapter 6

where the final value of Ψ (or ΨF) is composed by the initial value Ψ0, the
damage increase ∆Ψ and an uncertainty term ε dependent on the intensity of
the peak ground Velocity (V or PGV). The sum of ∆Ψ and ε should always be
equal or greater than zero. ∆Ψ itself is a function of several parameters such as
the material strength, the façade type, the soil type, etc. In Equation 6.1 these
are denoted with a tilde (~). This can be rewritten simply as Ψ being a function
of several variables, where the variables are separated by a vertical bar ( | ):

230

Chapter 6

Damage Accumulation Function
For the DAF, the value of Ψ following an earlier value of Ψ will be the sum of
the earlier value (Ψi-1), the instant damage increase ∆Ψ, and the uncertainty
term ε.

ϵ(Vi )
i

Ψi = Ψi−1 + ΔΨ( ∼ ) +
→i

Equation 6.4

In this sequence, the following sets can be defined for Ψ and the PGVs (V):

Ψ = {Ψ1, Ψ2, Ψ3, …, Ψi, …, ΨN}

Equation 6.5

V = {V1, V2, V3, …, Vi, …, VN}

Equation 6.6

From models and experiments, three distinct observations stand out regarding
the influence of repeated loading. The loading consists of imposed drift in the
experiments and of PGV in the models: 1) A larger load leads to greater
damage; 2) repeated loading of similar amplitude leads to a slight increase in
damage; and 3) a repeated load, larger than any previous loads, causes a clear
increase in damage. This is captured into a formulation with two parts for ∆Ψ:
Equation. 6.7 Parts a & b

ΔΨ =
→i

Ψ(Ψi−1 | Vi | Neq + 1 | ∼ ) − Ψ(Ψi−1 | Vi | Neq | ∼ ) if Vi ≤ (1 − ρ) ⋅ V→i (a)

{Ψ(Ψi−1 | Vi | 2 | ∼ ) − Ψ(Ψi−1 | V→i | 1 | ∼ )

if Vi > (1 + ρ) ⋅ V→i (b)

where: Vi is the PGV at instance i and V→i is the largest PGV up until i, without
including Vi, or:

V→i = max[V (1…i − 1)]

Equation 6.8

ρ is a factor determining the similitude of the earthquakes’ intensities. If
ρ=0.25 then a PGV that is larger than 25% the maximum PGV occurred until
then (V→i) will be considered a comparably large event and the second line of
Equation 6.7 becomes applicable. Similarly, Neq is the number of equivalent
PGV occurred until instance i. In other words, the count of all the events with a
PGV within the interval 25% smaller or larger than Vi. This is expressed as:

Neq =

i−1

I (V )
∑ N j
j=1

IN (Vj ) =

Vj

1 if − ρ < V − 1 ≤ ρ
0 otherwise

i

Equation 6.9

Phrased differently: the increase in damage at any instance will depend on
whether the PGV is similar (Eq. 6.7a) or comparably larger (Eq. 6.7b) than the
PGVs of events in the sequence up until that moment. If it is similar, then

Damage Accumulation Function

231

damage can be computed by evaluating the surrogate function for Ψ(~)
considering the difference between a homogenous sequence of PGVs with the
number of similar events and the same sequence with a number of similar
events plus one. This means that ∆Ψ is indeed the difference in the
homogenous sequence for an increase in the number of events by exactly one.
If the PGV is much larger than earlier events, then the increase in damage will
be the difference between that of 2 large events and 1 event with the previous
largest PGV. The entire process is schematised in Figure 6.3.1.
The value of ρ is somewhat arbitrary. What constitutes similar events and when
can an event be considered large in comparison to earlier events? From an
iterative calibration process considering the results of the next two sections,
good agreement was found by setting ρ=0.25.
Uncertainty
Equation 6.4 also contains an uncertainty term. As was determined in Chapter
5, the uncertainty is best characterised as a function of the value of PGV. Small
values of PGV carry a smaller uncertainty than larger values. This relationship, a
generalised extreme value distribution (see Section 5.3.2), is maintained.
However, adding this uncertainty at every iteration of ∆Ψ would lead to an
unreasonably large total uncertainty. For this reason, the uncertainty term is
weighted by its position in the sequence. The first value would receive the
complete uncertainty. For the second value, only half of the new uncertainty is
added; for the third, only a third; and so on:

ϵ(VN )
ϵ(V1) ϵ(V2 ) ϵ(V3)
+
+
+…+
1
2
3
N

Equation 6.10

The last value in the series will receive a relative small contribution of additional
uncertainty. This is reasonable since a large amount of uncertainty has been
considered already.
This means also that the influence of a large earthquake will be different if it
occurs early or later in the series. Towards the beginning, the uncertainty might
receive a larger value while at the end, the value will be smaller. This is also
reasonable since the evaluation of the surrogate function also depends on the
initial value of Ψ (in this case Ψi-1). Towards the end of the series, this value will
have been affected more by the accumulated uncertainty which will lead to a
larger increase without the need of considering the specific uncertainty term
corresponding to the large event at the end.

Chapter 6

ϵTotal =

232

Chapter 6

Start
Eq. 6.6

i=i+1

Determine V→i
Eq. 6.8

False

True

Determine Neq
Eq. 6.9

Use Eq. 6.7.b

Use Eq. 6.7.a

∆Ψ

→i

Assemble Ψi
Eq. 6.4

Calculate ε(V )/i
i

No
Ψi

Is i=N ?

Yes
Finished.
Eq. 6.5
Figure 6.3.1. Flowchart of the DAF procedure.

Damage Accumulation Function

233

Equations (Reprised & Reordered)

V = {V1, V2, V3, …, Vi, …, VN}

Equation 6.6

V→i = max[V (1…i − 1)]

Equation 6.8
Equation. 6.7 Parts a & b

ΔΨ =
→i

Neq =

Ψ(Ψi−1 | Vi | Neq + 1 | ∼ ) − Ψ(Ψi−1 | Vi | Neq | ∼ ) if Vi ≤ (1 − ρ) ⋅ V→i (a)

{Ψ(Ψi−1 | Vi | 2 | ∼ ) − Ψ(Ψi−1 | V→i | 1 | ∼ )

if Vi > (1 + ρ) ⋅ V→i (b)

i−1

I (V )
∑ N j
j=1

IN (Vj ) =

Vj

1 if − ρ < V − 1 ≤ ρ
i

0 otherwise
ϵ(VN )
ϵ(V1) ϵ(V2 ) ϵ(V3)
ϵTotal =
+
+
+…+
1
2
3
N
ϵ(Vi )
Ψi = Ψi−1 + ΔΨ( ∼ ) +
→i
i
Ψ = {Ψ1, Ψ2, Ψ3, …, Ψi, …, ΨN}

Equation 6.9
Equation 6.10
Equation 6.4
Equation 6.5

The application of the DAF is discussed later on in section 6.3.4 after
comparisons and validation in sections 6.3.2 and 6.3.3. However, a few
examples of Ψ sequences determined with the DAF are presented here. Figure
6.3.2 shows a sequence of PGV as determined for one location in Appingedam
using GMPEs (Bommer et al. 2019). This sequence is deterministic using the
PGV associated with the 75% probability. To consider a distribution of PGV, a
MonteCarlo simulation of probable timelines can be performed; see Section
6.3.4.
The sequence leads to an accumulation of damage. Larger events are linked to
a noticeable increase in damage. For example, the event with epicentre in
Appingedam in 2009 resulted in a ∆Ψ of about 0.2. A similar event in 2015 led
to a smaller increase. In Loppersum, significantly more events with a PGV larger
than 2 mm/s have been experienced; the values of PGV have also been higher.
This also results in a higher value of Ψ as depicted in Figure 6.3.3 with a likely
∆Ψ higher than 1.

Chapter 6

Example Histories with DAF

234

Chapter 6

Figure 6.3.2. An example history for the sequences of PGV measured in Appingedam.
Four initial values of Ψ are considered ranging from 0 to 1.5. The expected accumulated
Ψ is marked with a solid line and the confidence interval 5-95% is highlighted for every
case. Analysis based on wall of fired-clay brick masonry.

Figure 6.3.3. Similar to Figure 2 but for the town of Loppersum. See Figure 6.0.

Damage Accumulation Function

235

6.3.2. Comparison of DAF against Model Results

Figure 6.3.4 shows the mean increase in damage (∆Ψ, from the initial Ψ for the
models with pre-damage to the final Ψ) for all the models segregated by the
number of repeated identical PGVs; the graphs include the 25% to 75%
quantile (or from the end of the first to the third quartile). It can be observed
that damage increases as the repetitions of the PGV increase; moreover, larger
PGVs lead also to a larger increase in damage and a larger relative influence of
the repetition effect. It can also be seen that the higher PGVs also produce a
greater spread in the mean with the larger interquartile areas. These
differences arise because different initial conditions, varying soil, facade type,
and material strength also lead to a distinct ∆Ψ for every model. The middle
column of graphs shows the same model parameters evaluated with the DAF
function. In general, the observed trends are well reproduced by the DAF but
the spread in the results is lacking, especially for the low PGV values. This is
because the uncertainty parameter ε is a key component of the DAF, especially
because it is PGV-dependent and its mean is not zero. See equations 5.8 and
6.4. When a sufficient number of samples is simulated to reproduce the FEM
parameter combinations, as is depicted in the third column, the interquartile
spread has a better agreement with the FEM graphs on the first column of
curves. However, the DAF appears more conservative with an interquartile
range that achieves higher values compared to the FEM results.
This is further explored in Figure 6.3.5, which includes the results of the
heterogenous models. The first three rows of graphs show essentially the same
data presented in Figure 4. Here, the larger spread of the FEM models is
observable. This is also related to the size of the data: the lower number of

Chapter 6

Chapter 5 describes the learnings from about 3500 FEM models that were run
to analyse the influence of various parameters. The effect of parameters such
as initial Ψ value, façade stiffness, soil type, earthquake record, distance and
PGV, and number of subsequent earthquake vibrations, on the final value of
damage, as measured by Ψ, was examined. These models were then
employed to derive fragility curves to estimate the probability of light damage
at increasing PGV intensity. The focus of Chapter 5 was not placed, however,
on assessing the effect of repetition. This was further studied, instead, in
section 6.2. Here, additional models were considered including heterogeneous
sequences of PGV. Based on this pool of data, the DAF has been formulated. A
stricter comparison, with the goal of validation, is presented in this subsection.
In this manner, the behaviour of the DAF is evaluated against homogeneous
and heterogeneous sequences of vibrations.

236

Chapter 6

observations from the FEM models may present a larger spread than what a
larger population would show. The DAF data comprises thousands of points.

Figure 6.3.4. Mean increase in damage (∆Ψ) from the 3572 homogenous models and
their reproduction using the DAF, without and with its uncertainty parameter ε. Results
based on FEM results from Figure 5.2.4.

Damage Accumulation Function

237

The last row of Figure 6.3.5, with many more bars, includes the heterogeneous
models. Here, the difference between 1x8+1x16 and 2x16 can be observed.
However, this comparison is unfair, since the 2x16 group includes many more
models with variations. A better comparison is done later in Figures 6 and 7.
Nonetheless, the graph serves to compare the FEM results against the DAF
estimation. The mean ∆Ψ of the FEM models is higher than the mean
produced by the DAF, but the interquartile boxes are very much in agreement.
This is because the FEM results seem skewed, with a mean close to the upper
75% quantile. This is probably the result of the limited number of models and
the specific parameters chosen for these.

• repeated earthquakes lead to additional damage,
• the higher the PGV, the larger the damage increase,
• in a history with low PGV values, a relatively large value leads to a stark
increase,
• in a history with similar PGV values, an additional event leads only to a small
increase,
• the final values of damage between a large and a small, and a small and a
large PGV values are similar (see 32+16 and 16+32).

Chapter 6

Figure 6.3.6 compares the FEM and DAF results employing only the
parameters present in the heterogeneous models, so only Westerwijtwerd
records and only initial Ψ of 0.5 and 1, for example. The number of FEM
models reduces but the comparisons are straightforward. The graph shows for
example, that indeed, 1x16 outputs a smaller damage increase than 1x4+1x16.
The plots also show a good agreement between the sequences observed from
the models and from the DAF when looking at the interquartile boxes, though
the means of the FEM models seems higher. This is again visible in Figure 7,
which has the data neatly arranged to show the final sequences present in the
models. This figure emphasises the key observations from the FE models and
which are reproduced in the DAF:

238

Chapter 6

Figure 6.3.5. Box plot of the various combinations segregated by maximum PGV. The
mean is shown with a horizontal red line, the blue box encompasses the second and
third quartiles (25-75%) and the lines show approximately the 1% to 99% confidence
range of results (using the standard deviation of a normal distribution). Values outside
this range are considered outliers and appear as dots.

239

Figure 6.3.6. Similar as Figure 2 but only matching model parameters present in the new
models.

Chapter 6

Damage Accumulation Function

Chapter 6
240

1x16+1x4

2
1x16+1x8

2

2x8+1x16

2

1.5

2

1.5

1x8+1x16

1.5

2

1.5

M

2

FE

1.5

8
8
16
x8
x8
16
x
2x
F 1 AF 2 8+1x
M x8+1
x
DA
D
FE
2
F2
M
FE
DA
1x

1

M

2

FE

1

8
1x
6+
x1
F1
DA

1

6
x1
F1
DA

1

8
1x
+
16
1x

1

M
FE

16
1x

0.5

M
FE

0.5

4

1x

6+

x1

F1

DA

0.5

6

x1

F1

DA

0.5

x4

+1

16

1x

0.5

M
FE

16
1x

0

M
FE

0

6
x8
x1
F1
+1
x8
DA
F1
DA

0

16

1x

8+

1x

0

FE

M

8

1x

1x32+1x16

2x16+1x32

0
M
FE

2

1.5

1x16+1x32

1.5

2

1.5

M
FE

1.5

6
2
32
16
16
16
x
x
x1
x3
1
2x
F 1 AF 2 16+1
M x16+
x
DA
D
FE
2
F2
M
DA
FE
1x

1.5

M
FE

1

2x16+1x8

16
1x

1

2+
x3

1

DA

F1

1

2
x3
F1
DA

1

6
1
1x
2+
3
1x

0.5

M
FE

32
1x

0.5

M
FE

0.5

2

32
1x
6+
x1

0.5

DA

F1

0.5

6
x1
F1
DA

0
2
x3
+1
16
1x

0

M
FE

16
1x

0
M
FE

0
x8
16
16
x8
16
16
2x
+1 F 1x F 2x
+1
16
16
M
DA
DA F 2x
FE M 2x
DA
FE
1x

0
M

FE

2x16+1x4

x4
16
16
x4
16
16
2x
+1 F 1x F 2x
+1
16
16
M
DA
DA F 2x
FE M 2x
FE
DA
1x

2x32+1x16

2
6
16
32
32
32
x
x
x3
x1
1
2x
F 1 AF 2 32+1
M x32+
x
DA
D
FE
2
F2
M
DA
FE
1x

Figure 6.3.7. Similar as Figures 2 and 3 but for specific combinations with the related
preceding earthquakes extracted from the data and displayed in sequence.

Damage Accumulation Function

241

6.3.3. Comparison of DAF against Experimental Results
It is difficult to validate the DAF on the basis of experimental results because of
several reasons. First, the experiments repeated displacements while the DAF
evaluates the results of repeated forces. The earthquake vibrations applied at
the base of the structures represent an acceleration which translates to inertial
forces. Similar events, with a similar frequency content, will result in similar
induced forces. This assumes that the progression of damage does not modify
the dynamic response of the structure too much - though this effect is
considered in the FEM models. Regardless, the experiments were
displacement-controlled, and could not have been force-controlled since
cracking leads to non-linear behaviour that would have resulted in a loss of
control. This means that, to compare the DAF behaviour to that observed in
experiments with repetitions, an assumption must be made: that the increase in
damage while repeating force-based events should be similar to the decrease
in force while repeating displacement-based actions.

Nonetheless, a true quantification remains difficult. This is partly because the
experiments also showed an increase in damage simultaneously with the
reduction in force. However, the reduction in force is also visible for the
spandrels. In this case, damage was kept constant since the spandrels were
controlled by the width at the crack-mouth; see section 3.1. Consequently, the
comparison should be more direct, but the spandrels represent a smaller
portion of masonry and focused on a single crack. This contrasts with the
objective of the DAF which is meant to represent larger masonry components
with various cracks comprised by Ψ.
The spandrels, shown on the last row of Figure 6.3.8, are segregated by step,
which in their case, is related to the initial force before the reduction. This is
more comparable to the increasing PGV employed for the DAF graphs. Hence,
one can also observe that the force reduction, and increase in damage with the
DAF, are greater for the larger steps or PGVs.
Second, the experiments included a large number of repetitions. In most cases
thirty repetitions were applied to see a stabilisation in the force reduction. In
total, about three hundred repetitions happened during the tests. Yet, thirty

Chapter 6

The experiments observed a clear relationship between drift (or displacement)
and damage. This comparison is presented in Figure 6.3.8 for the walls; the
reduction in force is relative to the initial force at each step in the same manner
that the increase in damage is presented relative to the damage at the first
repetition. One can observe that the behaviour between the experiments and
the DAF is similar, with a decreasing slope as repetitions increase.

242

Chapter 6

repetitions of similar earthquake events is already a large amount of
repetitions. The larger number of repetitions was envisioned to consider that
vibrations contain several effective cycles. Nevertheless, this disparity
obfuscates the comparison.
Experiments on Walls

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0
Repetitive

-0.1

Median
Steps and Samples

0

10

Positive Cyclic

20

30

0

10

Relative Increase in Damage r

Repetitions

30

Median
Steps and Samples

0

10

Repetitions

20

-0.1

30

Repetitions

DAF Simulations

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0
PGV: 1 mm/s

-0.05

PGV: 2 mm/s

Median
Simulations

-0.1
0

5

10

15

PGV: 4 mm/s

Median
Simulations

0

Repeated Events

5

10

15

Median
Simulations

0

Repeated Events

5

10

15

-0.05
-0.1

Repeated Events

Experiments on Spandrels

0.25

Relative Force Reduction RF

20

-0.05

Negative Cyclic

Median
Steps and Samples

0.25

0.2

0.2

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05
Steps 1 & 2

Steps 3 to 5

Median

0
0

10

20

Repetitions

30

Relative Increase in Damage r

-0.05

Relative Force Reduction RF

0.15

Steps >6

Median

0

10

20

Repetitions

30

Median

0

10

20

Relative Force Reduction RF

Relative Force Reduction RF

0.15

0

30

Repetitions

Figure 6.3.8. Comparison of force reduction during wall experiments with the repetitive
protocol against expected damage increase evaluated with the DAF for various PGV
values. Bottom row, force reduction for the various steps of the spandrel tests.

Damage Accumulation Function

243

A third difficulty rests on the fact that the DAF has been mainly formulated to
evaluate heterogeneous sequences of PGVs. In the experiments this effect is
limited but not entirely absent. Indeed, the way the loading protocols were
formulated and arranged one after another reveals the same behaviour from
the FE models, also reproduced by the DAF. First, the repetitive protocol
considered five steps in a one-way cyclic tests. Then, the cyclic protocol
applied seven steps in a two-way cyclic fashion. The first five steps of the cyclic
protocol see little force reduction. This is analogous to the observation that
events, with a PGV smaller than what has occurred before, do not let to a
damage increase. The last two steps, however, do lead to a noticeable force
reduction; which compares to larger PGV events increasing damage even if
other events have happened before.
This effect is further reflected during the tests with the asymmetric loading
protocol. Unlike the repetitive and cyclic protocols, which applied symmetric
and regular cycles during each step, each step of the asymmetric protocol
comprised sub-steps more alike the various cycles within an earthquake record;
see section 3.1.1. The larger cycles within the sub-step led to a reduction in
force, but the smaller cycles did not. The overall reduction is more inline with
what is predicted by the DAF. The fewer asymmetric steps (but including substeps) represent the loading by the vibrations more loyally.
110

-110

100

-100

100

-100

90

-90

90

-90

80

-80

80

-80

70

-70

70

-70

60

-60

60

-60

50

-50

50

-50

40

-40

40

-40

30

-30

30

-30

20

-20

20

-20

10

-10

10

-10

0

50

100

150

SubCycles

200

0

50

100

150

200

SubCycles
Peaks

3 Subcycles = 1 Cycle
10 Cycles = 1 Step

Positive
Negative

Figure 6.3.9. Force reduction during two wall tests with the asymmetric loading
protocol.

Chapter 6

Comp 48
-110

Negative Peaks

Positive Peaks
Force in kN

Comp 47
110

244

Chapter 6

In conclusion, a direct comparison to investigate the behaviour during
repetitions between the experiments on walls and spandrels, and the damage
evolution predicted by the Damage Accumulation Function is problematic.
Nevertheless, the effect of repetition observed in the experiments is reflected
in the results output by the DAF.

6.3.4. Application: Probability Maps for Accumulated Damage
In Chapter 5, fragility maps were produced. These combined the hazard,
represented by its distribution of the PGV, with the response of the buildings,
depicted by their fragility curves. The DAF allows a similar procedure. In this
case, the result is a set of maps that include the history of PGV and their
compounding effect on damage of the masonry buildings. Both the PGV values
and the vulnerability of the buildings can be represented probabilistically. The
spatial and temporal distributions of the events are depicted in the following
map, Figure 10.
Magnitude
Epicentres

1.5

2.5

3

3.5

53°20'N

1995

2000

53°10'N

2005

Year

Latitude

2

2010

5 km
5 mi

OpenStreet

6°30'E

6°40'E

6°50'E

Longitude

2015

Groningen and Norg Earthquakes
Groningen Gas Field (1 km)
Groningen 6 km Buffer
Norg 6 km Buffer

2020

M 3

Figure 6.3.10 Overview of earthquake epicentres in the northeastern region. Right,
magnitude of the events over time.

Damage Accumulation Function

245

The map can be divided into cells. For each cell, the history of PGV can be
determined based on the epicentre and magnitude of each event using ground
motion prediction equations; for this example, the empirical formulation of
GMPEs by Bommer et al. (2019) are employed. The result is displayed in Figure
6.3.11 for a few combinations of initial damage, Ψ0, and final damage in terms
of probability contours. The distributions for the other parameters, such as the
material strength, or the soil type, are sampled as in Section 5.4.1.

To evaluate the contribution of considering the accumulation of damage with
the DAF, a comparison is drawn against the maps produced in Chapter 5.
Figure 5.4.4 presents the probability contours for three important events; the
event of Huizinge of 2012 is reprised in Figure 6.3.12 for the same Ψ | Ψ0 as in
Figure 6.3.11 thus expanding on Figure 5.4.4. This allows a direct comparison
for the effect of the most influential event against that of the entire history of
events.
First, the shape of the contours from the single event is mostly circular as the
propagation in the GMPE depends on the distance to the epicentre. For the
DAF map, multiple events are considered with their own epicentres. Second,
the outer probability contours from the single event encircle slightly smaller
regions. This means that considering the accumulated effect of multiple events
leads to higher probabilities; this is an expected result. Third, the contours
towards the centre of the region are much larger for the DAF case. This is
because of the larger number of events and the fact that their epicentres are
spread out thus modifying the shape of the contours.

Chapter 6

The contours encircle the areas for which the probability of the specified ∆Ψ is
at least 110-4 (or 1 in 10’000). Towards the centre north of the gas field, the
induced seismicity has caused the most events and with the highest
magnitudes, as was presented in Figure 10. This is also associated with a very
high probability of displaying visible damage (Ψ=1) for initially undamaged
masonry structures. Most of the buffer zone of the gas field is computed to
have a probability of at least 0.1% of displaying visible damage accumulated
over the past three decades of seismicity. In contrast, only the very centre of
the region is determined to exhibit a similar probability of having exceeded
DS1 (Ψ≥2.5). If the masonry walls considered, already presented visible initial
damage (Ψ0=1), then the region enlarges. In this case, most of the buffer zone,
excluding the southeastern cities of Veendam and Winschoten, displays a
probability of 1:10’000 of reaching or exceeding Ψ≥2.5.

246

Chapter 6

Figure 6.3.11. Probability contours for the accumulation of damage due to a history of
events.

For a specific location, the DAF can lead to a significant influence. This is the
case for places close to the centre of the region but relatively far from the
specific event of Huizinge. In Delfzijl, for instance, the probability of displaying
visible damage is less than 1% in the case of Huizinge, but considering the
entire history of events, this probability rises to 10%. However, the probability
of exceeding Ψ≥2.5 is virtually unaffected regardless of the initial damage
condition. For this case, the single, large event plays a more important role
than the accumulated effect of multiple smaller events.

Damage Accumulation Function

247

Chapter 6

Figure 6.3.12. For comparison against the DAF map, which considers the accumulation
of damage due to repeated events over thirty years, and a fragility-based map (Chapter
5) for the single event of Huizinge of August of 2012.

248

Chapter 6

6.4. Concept of Damage Hastening
When observing the accumulation of damage due to a specific hazard, one
should not neglect the ongoing effects of other hazards. In this work, an initial
condition, Ψ0, has been employed to evaluate the aggravation of damage due
to earthquake vibrations. However, the hazard that caused Ψ0 may still be
acting on the structure. Settlements, for example, often take place over many
years. During this time, damage increases. Seasonal temperature effects, for
instance, can accumulate damage over several seasons, capitalising on the
effect of repetition. Other hazards, like material-induced shrinkage, only affect
structures at the beginning of their service life. Over decades, masonry
buildings subjected to the weathering of wind, sun, and rain, will require repair
to replace affected units and repoint weakened mortar to prevent further
damage such as that caused by frost-thaw cycles on wet masonry, which can
lead to visible cracks.
Preventive maintenance indeed, is not unique to masonry structures. Steel
elements must be recoated and painted to avoid corrosion, while timber needs
to be treated regularly to prevent rot. Concrete structures suffer from other
problems.
One can argue that buildings naturally display damage over time. This is the
essence for the need of maintenance. Masonry buildings on soft soils will
inevitably display visible cracks as they move, together with the soil,
throughout the seasons. In this context, extraneous hazards, like earthquake
vibrations, do not cause damage but aggravate, instead, existing damage.
They accelerate the development of damage that would eventually have
appeared on the structure without the hazard regardless. It is this acceleration
of damage, herein denoted as ‘damage hastening’ that should be quantified.
This section does not attempt to measure the effect of earthquakes using their
damage hastening. This would first require to have a thorough understanding
of the autogenous progression of damage in masonry structures, which would
comprise a study on its own. The section provides instead a reflection on the
true damage aggravation effect of earthquake vibrations and a methodology to
determine damage hastening.

Damage Accumulation Function

249

6.4.1. Definition of ‘Hastening’ in the Context of Damage
Damage hastening can be defined as the reduction in the time that a structure
would show a specific level of damage because of the influence of a particular
hazard. When speaking of hastening, there are usually two or more hazards
involved, though one can also consider a change in a single hazard. In the case
of a multi-hazard, the first hazard causes a progression of damage and the
second hastens this progression. For example, a masonry structure on a soft
soil will likely experience settlement damage over time; let us assume that after
five years, the building would display a Ψ=1. If this building is located in a
region of seismicity, it will be affected by this second hazard with earthquake
vibrations. Because of this additional hazard, the building displays Ψ=1 after
only three years. A Ψ=1 has been hastened by two years; this represents a
speed up of about 1.7x.

Indeed, because evaluating hastening considers two alternative timelines, one
with and without the affecting multi-hazard, it is always based on predictions
for both scenarios. In these predictions, it is difficult to determine the
progression of damage from the first hazard and the effect of the second
hazard. Moreover, both hazards could continue acting together and thus the
effect of the second hazard will affect the progression of damage from the first
hazard.

Chapter 6

A similar example can be reversed. A certain building next to a road will
develop a Ψ of 2 in ten years due to traffic-induced vibrations. The
construction of a new neighbouring building can lead to settlements which
take place in the first five years of the new construction. After the five years, the
building has developed Ψ=2; this results is a hastening value of 2x as the time
required to progress to the same damage has halved. If the new building is
erected after the original building has already been subjected to five years of
vibrations, the effect might be different. The progression of damage due to the
traffic vibration is not likely to be linear. Also, the effect of the settlements on a
certain value of Ψ0 will change.

250

Chapter 6

Damage Evolution

2.5

n
tio
a
l
mu
cu
c
A

2

1.5

= 0.93

Damage Measurement over Time
Prediction based on First 10 Years

Hastening: 1.8x

Aggravation

3

1

2 Effects: Cumulation
0.5

0

Situation 1
0

2

4

6

8

Situation 2
10

12

14

16

18

20

Years

Figure 6.4.1. The damage evolution of an example building over 20 years.

A first example is provided in Figure 6.4.1. Here, two situations are considered.
This could represent the case of a masonry building settling under its own
weight. After ten years, an expansion is made which accentuates the
settlement and increases the rate in which damage appears. The renovation
could be considered as the second hazard. Similarly, the figure could represent
a single hazard but its intensity is changed after 10 years. For example, traffic
vibrations are intensified as a result of changes in the pattern of traffic.
In this fabricated example, the evolution of damage during the first period is
linear. This makes it easy to conceive an empirical prediction for the absence of
the second hazard or the change in the second period by extrapolating the
linear trend. The difference between the predicted final damage without the
contribution of the second hazard can be computed; this is the value of ∆Ψ.
One could assess the influence of the second situation by observing ∆Ψ; this is
also performed in Chapter 5. However, the concept of hastening emphases
that damage may be accumulated over time and the effect of repetition could
play a role. For this example, the second hazard hastens damage, observed at
the end of the 20-year period, by 1.8x.
A second example considers repeated earthquake vibrations. This is computed
using the DAF with a real history of earthquake events; see Figure 6.0. The
progression of damage without the earthquake hazard is idealised as a linear
trend between Ψ0=0.5 and Ψ=1.5 after thirty years - the cause could be related
to settlements. Over this time, the earthquake hazard aggravates the initial
damage, accumulating additional damage until a Ψ=1.5 is reached after only
20 years. This corresponds to a hastening of 1.7x. Damage continues

Damage Accumulation Function

251

increasing until Ψ≈2.3 is reached, resulting in a damage increase of 55%. In this
simulation, before the effect of each repetition is computed with the DAF
(flowchart of Figure 6.3.1), Ψ is adjusted to consider the linear increase given
by the first hazard. No effect on the damage caused by the first hazard is
assumed because of the damage increase exerted by the hastening hazard.
Probabilistic Damage Hastening due to Earthquakes

3
Expected
Expected

f

Expected

f
f
f

1.5

0.9

with Earthquakes +55%

=0.5
f
f

2

f

1

without Earthquakes

0.8

=1.0

0.7

=1.5
=2.0

0.6

=2.5

=3.0
f

0.5
0.4

1

0.3

Exceedance Probability

2.5

f

0.2

0.5

0.1
0

0
1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year (1.7x Time hastening)

Since the DAF considers a term of uncertainty, its predictions are probabilistic;
see Figure 6.3.3. The dark line in Figure 6.4.2 corresponds to the expected
value of Ψ, but it is possible that Ψ is higher or lower, though never lower than
the damage progression bound by the first hazard. The exceedance probability
of specific values of Ψ is included in the figure. While the expected Ψ at the
end of the period is about 2.3, there is a 5% probability that a value of Ψ=3 has
been reached or exceeded.
Damage hastening can be used as an additional or alternative metric to
quantify the effect of a hazard. This is especially useful and relevant if the
hazards considered lead to an accumulation of damage over time. The
hastening values can be employed directly when determining when to
schedule maintenance or interventions.

Chapter 6

Figure 6.4.2. Example of damage progression for a building in Loppersum with a
Ψ0=0.5 that would have reached Ψ=1.5 after 30 years. Because of seismicity, the final
expected damage is increased by 55%. The exceedance probability curves are on the
right axis.

252

Chapter 6

6.4.2. Time as the Hazard
In the definition of damage hastening, time plays a crucial role. Time itself
cannot be a hazard, but given specific scenarios of multi-hazards, the passage
of time will lead to damage. As such, time can be placed on the hazard axis
instead of, for example, PGV.
Because of its effects on buildings, the Dutch government considered different
scenarios of gas production to reduce seismicity. The change in seismicity
would occur over time and lead to a different number and magnitude of events
in the future. Every scenario would convey a distinct seismicity. Hence, each
scenario would be associated with a different progression of damage on
masonry buildings. This is a problem for which the DAF is ideally suited.
Let us consider three different scenarios of gas production which in turn lead to
different yearly rates of events. The magnitude of the events is also affected.
The physical relationship between the dynamics of gas production throughout
the gas field and the resulting seismicity is a topic on its own which cannot be
contemplated here. Instead, reasonable assumptions are made regarding the
yearly rate of events as per Table 6.4.1 for three imagined scenarios. The
statistical distribution of past events with a magnitude greater than 1.5 is
employed to determine a mean yearly rate of events. This mean yearly rate is
reduced for two of the scenarios.
Table 6.4.1. Three scenarios for potential future seismicity distinguished by their mean
yearly rate of events.
Scenario

Initial Yearly Rate
(year 0)

Final Yearly Rate
(year 50)

Decrease

Continued

11.5

11.5

-

Reduced

11.5

½ · 11.5

linear

Stopped

11.5

0

linear

The distribution in the magnitude of the events is unaffected for this example.
Similarly, the spatial distribution of the epicentres is kept identical to the
statistical distribution of past years and a correlation with the magnitude is
drawn. Whether these assumptions are realistic is not investigated.
Figure 6.4.3 presents the past events and a histogram of their magnitude. To
aid in visualising a Weibull probabilistic distribution, magnitude values from 0
upwards are included. However, since the focus is on the larger events, an
adjusted curve, fit to the tail end of the distribution, is considered. The number
of events with a magnitude of at least 1.5 is counted per year in the bottom of
the figure. The mean trend in the period 1990-2023 is about 11.5 events/year.

Damage Accumulation Function

253

Based on the three scenarios of Table 1, the projection of the yearly rate is
drawn.
The second part of the figure considers the spatial distribution of events. Based
on the historical epicentres, two beta distributions are fit to the latitude and
longitude coordinates of the events. The distributions can be adjusted based
on the magnitude of the events since the largest events have been more
clustered.
0.15
Magnitude
Histogram of Events
Weibull =1.6 =1.9
Adjusted M 1.5
Weibull Fit

Density

0.1

0.05

0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Magnitude
Frequency of Events

30

Yearly Event Count M 1.5
Smooth Trend
Median
Scenario: Continued
Scenario: Reduced
Scenario: Stopped

Yearly Rate

25
20
15
10
5
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

2045

Figure 6.4.3a. Overview of the Weibull distribution for the Magnitude of events, the
correlated latitude and longitude for the epicentre of events, and the frequency or
yearly rate of potential events. These are based on statistical analysis of past events;
updated March of 2024.

A simulation to generate a timeline of events is performed. Using the yearly
rate, it is possible to sample, on a daily basis, whether an event will occur. If it
does, its location and magnitude are sampled from the aforementioned
distributions. For each of the scenarios, hundreds of timelines are generated in
order to produce a good probabilistic depiction of the scenario. For every
timeline, an evolution of damage is calculated at given locations using the DAF
as in Section 6.3.1. The timelines of each scenario are then combined to
generate fragility curves where the number of years appears on the horizontal
axis. This comparison appears in Figure 6.4.5 for the location of Loppersum,
exemplified in this section.

Chapter 6

Year

254

Chapter 6

Groningen and Norg Earthquakes

53°20'N
53°10'N

Latitude

M 3
Fit Beta Distribution

53°N

10 km
5 mi

OpenStreetMap

6°30'E

6°45'E

7°E

Longitude
Figure 6.4.3b. Distribution of epicentres of historical events.

Figure 6.4.4. Comparison of the historical timeline (top left) and five simulated timelines
of events.

Damage Accumulation Function

255

The curves reveal the differences in exceedance probability and expected Ψ for
each scenario. Two cases of Ψ0 and threshold for Ψ are analysed. The trends
are as expected, with the scenario of the smallest seismicity also producing the
lowest values of damage. The probability of exceeding DS1, even considering
visible damage at the beginning of the period, is very small. Between
scenarios, the differences appear relatively small. This is due to the simulation
of the hazard and its seismicity. Whether these assumptions are realistic is not
investigated; still, the DAF is successfully employed to contrast the scenarios.
Years
Exceedance Probability

0.8

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Probability

0.6

p(

1|

p(

2.5 |

0

=0)
0

=1)

0.4
0.2
0

1
Scenarios
Scenario: Continued
Scenario: Reduced
Scenario: Stopped

0.5
0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Years
Figure 6.4.5. Fragility curves for the three scenarios as determined with the DAF analysis
of multiple timelines per scenario. These are the fragility curves at the location of
Loppersum based on idealised future scenarios with simplified assumptions. Year zero of
the simulation corresponds to last year of the real history.

Furthermore, for the probability of damage at the end of the 50 years, a map
of probability contours is calculated as in Section 6.3.4. The three scenarios can
thus be compared in terms of the final probability contours; see Figure 6.4.6.
As expected, the inner regions encircled by the contours determined for the
Reduced and Stopped scenarios are smaller than for the Continued scenario,
but the outer regions, representing the very low probabilities, are similar
between the scenarios. This is because the very low probabilities, appearing far
from the centre of the region, are mostly determined by the influence of the

Chapter 6

Expected

1.5

256

Chapter 6

events with a relative large magnitude which occur at the centre of the region;
see also Figure 6.3.12. The inner circles are affected instead by the repetition
of events, for which the Continued scenario, with a higher rate of events, is
dominant.
These simulations serve to highlight the importance of time for repeated
events and the versatility of the DAF formulation. While the concept of
hastening is not directly applied, a multi-hazard could be included. The result
would be a combination of figures 2 and 4. For clarity in the example, a starting
hazard has been omitted. Nonetheless, the scenarios considering a reduction
in seismicity, lead to the opposite of hastening: retardation. For the expected
Ψ, damage appears slower than in the scenario where the current rate of
events is maintained, in this case a retardation of certain values of Ψ can be
observed.

Figure 6.4.6. Probability contours for the three scenarios, at the end of the period
considered, for the case exceeding DS1 or Ψ=2.5. The initial condition is Ψ0=1.

257

Chapter 7
Conclusions and Outlook
This final chapter consolidates the findings from this investigation into light
damage in masonry structures due to seismic vibrations. This study embarked
on a detailed journey to understand and quantify light, crack-based damage in
masonry, a subject of significant importance in regions prone to seismic
activities in the Netherlands.

The conclusions presented in the following sections, and focused on the
research questions (Section 7.1), are drawn from an extensive analysis of each
aspect of the research, enriched by collaborations and comparisons with other
experts. These insights provide a nuanced view of how masonry structures
react to seismic actions and the potential risks involved in terms of light
damage. As the discussion is wrapped up, I will also reflect on the relevance
(Section 7.2) and limitations of the study (Section 7.3) and suggest directions
for future research (Section 7.4). This chapter not only aims to summarise the
key findings but also to offer a perspective on the broader implications of the
research in the context of changing environmental conditions and societal
attitudes towards (infrastructure) resilience and damage (Section 7.5).

Chapter 7

The approach was multi-faceted, involving the development of a new scale for
measuring light damage, conducting innovative experiments for monitoring
crack initiation and progression, and collaborating on calibrating numerical
models to reflect observed damage behaviours. This comprehensive method
allowed me to explore the probability of damage under varying seismic
conditions, adding a crucial layer of understanding to the field.

258

Chapter 7

7.1. Answers and Conclusions
This work set out to investigate ‘light damage’ in masonry and its relationship
to seismic vibrations. This not only concerned the initiation of new damage
but, in particular, an aggravation of existing damage, being present in
structures due to e.g. uneven settlements, was to be examined. Additionally,
an accumulation of damage due to repeated seismic events was a concern. To
accurately portray these relationships, damage and its exacerbation had to be
precisely quantified. Since light damage represents mainly crack-based
damage in masonry, this translates to understanding the initiation and
propagation of cracks in masonry and linking it to the repeated potential
seismic vibrations. Moreover, since masonry and damage have a large
variability, the potential damage should be quantified in terms of its probability.
This led to the formulation of the following research goal:
To objectively and probabilistically quantify the initiation and aggravation
of crack-based damage in (pre-damaged) masonry for (repeated) seismic
events.
To achieve this goal, a five step, physics-based process was devised. To list:
First, the definition of a scale with which to measure light damage (increments).
Second, the design and realisation of experiments to observe crack initiation
and propagation, also due to the repetition. Third, the calibration of numerical
models accurately reproducing the light damage behaviour. Fourth, the
extrapolation of the calibrated models to analyse the effect of seismic
vibrations also on an initial damage condition. And fifth, the analysis of
variations in the models and their relationship to damage to establish the
probability of damage in fragility curves and maps.
This five step process has been successfully implemented in this work. Some of
the steps have been worked on with the collaboration of other authors. The
conclusions of individual subquestions formulated as part of the main research
question is presented next.

7.1.1. Objective, Continuous Scale for Damage and its Aggravation
What is a damage scale or measure capable of objectively characterising
masonry light damage (for various relevant causes)?
Seismic vibrations and quasi-static soil movements due to subsidence generally
lead to cracks in masonry structures. Other types of masonry damage, such as
crushing or spalling, are linked to other causes or actions. Moreover, damage in
masonry for the serviceability limit state, also known as damage states one and

Conclusions and Outlook

259

two (DS1+DS2) or simply ‘light damage’, consists of narrow cracks, up to five
millimetres in width.
To objectively measure masonry damage, a continuous scale has been
proposed. The scale or parameter does not depend on subjective descriptions
of the damage but can be calculated based on the measured crack width,
length and number of cracks. These are computed together to produce a scalar
measure that is related to crack-based damage. In this way, the parameter
maintains a degree of comparability to existing damage scales based on
cracks. The parameter, Ψ, is tuned in such a way that a value of Ψ=1 marks the
threshold for visible damage with cracks of about 0.1mm in width; a value of
Ψ=2 denotes easily observable damage (crack width ≈ 1mm), and the upper
threshold for light damage, encompassing DS1 and DS2, is set at Ψ=4.
Moreover, the value of Ψ gives an indications as to the ease and cost of repair
of masonry damage.

The continuous and objective parameter is extremely well suited to monitor
damage and evaluate small increases in damage from laboratory experiments
and numerical models automatically. These small increases can be related to
purposed changes in the experiments and models to detect the influence of
variations in the boundary conditions or the strength of the materials, for
example. For investigations in real structures, Ψ can be used to compare
increases in damage against earlier inspections. However, comparisons
between different buildings are less practical unless the differences in size and
materials can be accounted for in the cost of repair.
The damage parameter devised has been successfully used in this work to
investigate the influence of repeated seismic vibrations and certain soil
deformations on typical Dutch masonry. In this manner, the first step is
completed.

Chapter 7

Furthermore, the continuous parameter allows for investigations into ∆Ψ or the
increase, aggravation, or accumulation of damage. Values of ∆Ψ are associated
with different degrees of detectability, whether the increase in damage can be
observed, and contribution to the cost of repair. The cost of repairing damage
increased by ∆Ψ=1 is entirely attributable to the cause aggravating the initial
damage, while a ∆Ψ≤0.1 cannot be discerned by the naked eye, and in
practice, cannot be measured by observation only. A threshold of ∆Ψ=0.2 is
set as a marker for a visible or noticeable damage increase. Lower increases of
damage can of course be measured with dedicated monitoring equipment.

260

Chapter 7

7.1.2. Monitoring Crack-Based Damage Aggravation from
Experiments
How can cracking, relevant for light damage, be accurately surveyed in
masonry experiments?
Answering of this research question required two elements. One, that
experiments had to be designed and executed such that they actually display
(repeated) light damage; and two, that this light damage can be measured in
an accurate manner.
For the former, a loading protocol was drafted based on an imposed in-plane
drift on full-scale masonry walls such that one crack with a width of 0.1 mm
appeared. Then, based on this initial drift, subsequent cycles of imposed drift
were applied. These cycles followed increasing steps of repeated
displacements so that the effects of repetition could also be evaluated. This
guaranteed that the specimens displayed cracks in the light damage range.
To measure these cracks, which could appear anywhere on the surface of the
specimen, photogrammetry was used. In order to employ Digital Image
Correlation (DIC) to observe the entire full-scale walls while detecting and
tracking cracks narrower than 0.1 mm, several improvements were applied:
First, a high-resolution camera, linked to a high-speed flash and timed by the
computer controlling the test, was implemented. This setup allowed to
accurately capture the displacement field of the surface of the wall at the
instances of maximum and zero drift. The camera settings were configured and
a lens was selected such that the sharpest possible image was achieved
without distortion. A camera with 51 M pixels with a 35 mm lens capable of f/
2.0 was stepped down to f/9.0 with an exposure of 1/100 of a second. The
exposure was controlled with the flash illuminating the sample for 1/63’000 s to
prevent motion blur from vibrations (in the camera) and mitigate the influence
of any other lightning sources in the laboratory.
Second, the surface of the masonry was painted with a high-contrast black-andwhite speckle pattern. Unlike typical applications, the minimum and maximum
size of the speckles was controlled using a stencil in order to achieve the
maximum resolution and measurement density. The stencil was laser-cut out of
a flexible polycarbonate sheet and designed with a program that randomly
located speckles with a size and spacing drawn from a uniform probabilistic
distribution that would translate to 2-5 pixels for the camera. This was
determined to be the optimum configuration to produce efficient subsets of
pixels that could be tracked later by software maximising the density of
measurement points.

Conclusions and Outlook

261

Finally, a DIC post-processing program was written to analyse the images and
focus on the displacement fields and its local discontinuities. Common
applications emphasise post-processing to obtain a strain field, but for tracking
cracks, displacement discontinuities are desired. The program was integrated
with a crack-detecting algorithm that characterised individual cracks and
monitored them throughout the loading history.
In summary, this approach presents an effective method for accurately
surveying light damage in masonry via cracking. Through a carefully designed
loading protocol, light damage was consistently induced in masonry walls,
producing identifiable cracks. The utilisation of Digital Image Correlation (DIC)
with a high-resolution camera and a specialised speckle pattern enabled
precise crack detection and monitoring. The development of a DIC postprocessing program, focused on displacement discontinuities, further
enhanced the accuracy of crack tracking. This integrated approach marks a
significant advancement in masonry research, offering a reliable technique for
assessing light damage in masonry experiments.

7.1.3. Damage Aggravation by Subsequent Actions
How is light damage, caused by settlements or other autogenous actions in
masonry buildings, aggravated by seismic vibrations, especially after
multiple seismic events?

First, experiments were tested under repeated and increasing loading. These
showed that cracks from previous loading cycles would propagate even at
repeated, identical loading and certainly at larger loads. When imposed inplane drifts were increased by 25%, crack widths would double. The length of
the cracks increased about 50%. Additionally, two specimens were constructed
with unbonded joints in locations that resemble settlement-induced cracks.
When these ‘existing cracks’ were in a region where cracks due to lateral
loading would naturally appear, they aggravated. When they were in other
parts of the specimen, the cracks would activate but seldom propagate.
Second, the numerical models, calibrated on the experiments, were used to
investigate how damage from specific actions would worsen. Various models of
masonry walls were first subjected to settlement actions by applying a
settlement shape in the form of a vertical displacement underneath an
interface at the base of the models. The no-tension interface allowed the walls
to deform and develop cracks consistent with those observed in real structures

Chapter 7

Existing light damage is worsened by the propagation of cracks. These grow in
width and length, while new cracks become visible. This intuitive observation
was further studied and quantified in two ways:

262

Chapter 7

under similar actions. The settlement action was applied in such a way that
cracks constituted light damage at various intensities of Ψ (Ψ0: 0 to 1.5 in 0.5
increments). Subsequently, earthquake vibrations were applied at the base also
at varying intensities. The model variations established for instance, that
weaker masonry experienced a larger increase in damage and that higher
values of Peak Ground Velocity (PGV) led to even larger increases. While these
relationships are not unexpected, they have been well quantified. For example,
models of walls on peat (soft soil) accumulated 33% more damage than walls
on the comparatively stiff sandy soil; while, models of walls with a window
opening attained a 25% higher increase in damage than walls without a
window. Similarly, models of walls subjected to two consecutive identical
seismic events displayed on average 10% higher damage increase than those
subjected to only one event.
What is the probability of visible light damage for masonry structures in
the region of Groningen, primarily due to seismic actions, but considering
the probable current state of the buildings?
From the relationships observed, a surrogate function was regressed. The
regression was performed with a custom model and a non-linear fit.
Comparatively, a neural network (NN) model was also fitted to the models’
results. However, the NN did not reproduce the expected behaviour in some
cases in between data points and outside the calibrated interval. The custom,
or ‘reasoned’ model, was designed such that the physical relationships would
be maintained. For example, at increasing PGV, also increasing damage is
expected. The surrogate models allowed to conduct a MonteCarlo simulation
where the various parameters were assigned probabilistic distributions and
(co)relationships. This analysis enabled the estimation of damage probabilities
for different PGV values and initial conditions (Ψ0). The resulting ‘fragility or
vulnerability curve’ indicates, for example, that a masonry wall at 10 mm/s PGV
has a 5% chance of sustaining light damage, defined as visible cracks of at least
0.1 mm. This probability increases to 20% if the wall has pre-existing,
undetectable damage, like that caused by differential settlements. At lower
PGVs, the probability of damage is accordingly lower.
This highlights the importance of considering a structure's existing condition
when assessing seismic impacts, particularly for low PGV vibrations. It suggests
that damage claims should account for both new and exacerbated pre-existing
damage. Compared to other studies on masonry fragility curves for 'damage
state 1', the range defined in this study aligns well with empirical curves
derived from claims data, especially the curves considering initial undetectable
damage (Ψ0=0.5).

Conclusions and Outlook

263

7.1.4. The Effect of Repetition on Damage Accumulation
How is intrinsic light damage hastened by seismic vibrations?
The final subquestion deals specifically with the effects of repeated vibrations
on existing damage. Repetition has been a consistent topic throughout several
chapters in this work. Experiments demonstrated that cracks grow under
identical repeated cycles. Calibrated numerical models showed damage
increase under repeated actions. And, extrapolated models displayed
aggravation of existing damage by different subsequent actions. Nonetheless,
these increases are minor; for repetitions of high intensity (PGVs larger than
30 mm/s), damage can increase by up to 10% on average.

Since repeated actions accumulate damage over time, they are comparable to
progressive autogenous damage. The foreign actions will cause visible damage
(Ψ=1 or Ψ=2) to occur earlier than only due to autogenous causes. It is thus
dependent on the intrinsic damage development of a structure and the history
or sequence of repeated actions. In Loppersum, a village in the centre of the
Groningen province, where frequent PGVs have been measured in the last two
decades, a masonry structure that would have developed a ∆Ψ of 1 due to
autogenous causes in the same period, would see this increase occur 40%
earlier, or with a 1.7x hastening, due to the vibrations. In Delfzijl, where fewer
significant events have been experienced, the hastening is about 1.3x. These
results can also be assessed in a probabilistic manner; however, these findings
are highly dependent on the intrinsic progression of damage in masonry
structures and will require more exhaustive research before additional results
can be confidently analysed.

Chapter 7

The final chapter treated intrinsic light damage in masonry structures and its
natural development over time. Natural soil movements, material shrinkage,
and thermo-hygral variations lead to intrinsic damage that require periodic
maintenance; though many masonry buildings are seldom given proper
maintenance. Under the assumption that intrinsic or autogenous damage
advances over time, the effect of foreign actions can be compared. In this
manner, another measure with which to evaluate the effect of repetition is
crafted: damage hastening. Hastening is defined in the dictionary as to cause
something undesirable to happen sooner than it otherwise would.

264

Chapter 7

7.1.5. Answer to the Main Objective
The five-step approach employed herein, i.e. the ‘how’ to answer the subquestions, is part of this work’s goal. As Step 1, the research developed an
ingenious approach to objectively quantify light damage in masonry structures,
particularly in the context of seismic events. A novel damage parameter, Ψ,
was introduced to measure light damage based on crack dimensions, offering a
scalar value that reflects different damage levels. This parameter also facilitates
the assessment of damage increase (∆Ψ), integrating factors like visibility and
repair costs. To precisely track crack-based damage, the study employed a
sophisticated technique using Digital Image Correlation (DIC) coupled with
high-resolution imaging and a specialised speckle pattern. This approach
enabled accurate monitoring of light damage in full-scale masonry wall
experiments, effectively capturing the initiation and progression of cracks;
observing damage in these experiments constitutes Step 2.
The research further examined the aggravation of light damage due to seismic
vibrations, employing both experimental and numerical modelling techniques.
Experiments demonstrated the propagation of cracks under repeated seismic
loading, while non-linear finite-element numerical models, calibrated on these
experiments (Step 3), simulated the impact of seismic vibrations on masonry
with pre-existing light damage. These models highlighted how various factors,
including soil type and structural features like window openings, affect the
extent of damage aggravation (Step 4). Additionally, a probabilistic analysis
was conducted, creating a model to estimate the likelihood of visible light
damage under different seismic intensities and pre-existing conditions (Step 5).
The study also explored the effect of repeated seismic events on accelerating
intrinsic light damage, revealing that such events can hasten the appearance of
visible damage in masonry structures, a crucial insight for understanding the
cumulative impact of seismic activity in regions prone to such events.

Conclusions and Outlook

265

7.2. Relevance and Contributions
7.2.1. Scientific Relevance
In comparison to literature, this bottom-up approach presents several scientific
contributions. Three types of reference studies can be identified from literature:
First, empirical analyses, which are drawn from damage claims or reports.
These have difficulty isolating the origin of the reported damage and thus
cannot draw reliable quantitative conclusions about the effects of earthquakes,
accumulation, or repetition. A physical, bottom-up approach, seeks to
understand the process leading to damage. This is accomplished with the
experiments and models in this study.
Second, extrapolative curves, on the basis of ULS values or a pushover curve,
infer the behaviour or limits for light damage. These cannot express clear limits
for visible damage or its propagation since this is not explicitly modelled.
Nonetheless, many of these fragility curves fall within the thresholds
established in this work, where clear limits are established.
Third, studies which do look at crack formation but where damage is
insufficiently quantified; these rarely take the step to calibrate models and
employ them to investigate the effect of earthquakes. This step is explored in
this work and so a good damage quantification method is transferred to the
assessment of earthquake damage probability.
Many studies are affected by more than one of these shortages. Empirical
studies monitoring damage sometimes lack accurate definitions for damage;
the assignment of a damage grade is left to the inspector. Similarly,
experiments where light damage is monitored, often do not establish a clear
relation between the load acting on the specimens and its counterpart in actual
buildings.
In this context, the present work adds upon these shortages.

Moreover, the study is socially relevant on several aspects; these are gathered
in this separate subsection. It is clear that the Groningen region has
experienced significant societal and economic unrest due to the seismic
activities linked to gas extraction. The Dutch government established plans to
reimburse damage due to the consequences of this activity. With the inverse of
proof, where all cracks are deemed related to this mining activity, unless proven
otherwise, a significant advantage was given to the inhabitants. Still, one asks,
in which region should this ruling be effective? One can imagine that buildings
located in the other side of the country, far away from the seismic area, which

Chapter 7

7.2.2. Societal Relevance

266

Chapter 7

may also have cracks due to settlements, temperature effects, etc., should not
be considered. The fragility maps developed in this thesis may help to answer
such questions.
Yet, this study does not help to answer what is an acceptable probability of
damage; this is left to policy makers and sociologists. Instead, this work helps
to determine which probabilities of damage are associated to which intensities
of damage (or the probability of small cracks). Furthermore, it quantifies that
repetition affects the expected damage, and that initial damage will also alter
the progression of further damage. For damage on bare, fired-clay brick
masonry walls, the thresholds at which increases in damage are actually
noticeable, have also been defined. This contributes to the statement that
while an aggravation of the existing damage cannot be excluded, this increase
has seldom an effect in the visibility or the cost of repair of the damage. The
regions and cases when it does, can be determined.
Indeed, this quantitative knowledge will be useful when formulating strategies
for damage compensation. Additionally, it should have an effect on the
perception of safety, demonstrating that the aggravation of damage is unlikely
to lead to an exceedance of light damage - transitioning into structural
damage with associated safety issues - at least for the in-plane actions
evaluated in this study. Moreover, it should help define repair and mitigation
strategies (see 7.4.4) that would be effective in the region and in future cases of
mining and building damage.
Understanding and addressing minor damage is thus crucial for maintaining
public trust and ensuring that the social fabric of the region remains intact.
Similarly, understanding the nature of light damage and developing methods
to quantify and manage it can help in better planning and decision-making,
potentially reducing economic costs and social tensions related to property
damage and safety concerns. Communities in affected regions can be better
educated about the risks and appropriate responses, enhancing community
resilience and institutional trust.
In summary, the work herein is highly relevant from a societal perspective as it
intersects with public safety, economic stability, legal and policy frameworks,
and scientific innovation. It contributes valuable knowledge that can be used to
mitigate the negative impacts of seismic activities associated with gas
extraction, enhancing community resilience and informing socially-fair
practices.

Conclusions and Outlook

267

7.2.3. Utilisation
The way these results can be used is hinted at in the preceding subsections.
Here, a more specific list is gathered. First, experiments on cracks and crack
propagation, together with the improvements to DIC on masonry, will help to
understand damage in the field. It contributes to the pool of crack patterns
related to (earthquake) loading, and to crack propagation, among others.
Monitoring strategies could take advantage of DIC. The calibration models also
reflect on successful strategies to replicate crack propagation and identify
subjects for further study. Similarly, the extrapolation models and the
exploration models in Chapter 4, suggest strategies to evaluate relevant effects
in the study of damage for various hazards. These can be further expanded.
Moreover, a compilation of results from experimental tests has been
consolidated. These are published (see Appendix F) and can thus be used by
other researchers as a benchmark to calibrate (other types of) numerical models
or compare against other types of tests.
Furthermore, the probabilistic strategy to assess the probability of damage and
its aggravation, on the basis of a surrogate model and a Montecarlo simulation,
can be adapted and applied to other hazards. In this work, it is employed with
two examples: settlements from soil distortions, and vibrations from
earthquakes; other actions and hazards, such as flooding, could also be
quantified.

Chapter 7

The utilisation of the results of these analyses have already been mentioned:
insight into damage and its probability will help policy and compensation
strategies. Moreover, the study into the accumulation of damage, with the
Damage Accumulation Function (DAF), revealed several uses: first, a
quantification of accumulated damage from decades of past earthquake
events; second, a method to forecast future damage, including the evaluation
of different scenarios. This can be used to take informed decisions about the
impact of gas mining in the future.

268

Chapter 7

7.3. Limitations - Restrictions of the Scope
Several aspects of this study must be contemplated within their limitations. This
section presents some of the key constraints within which to frame the aforelisted conclusions.

7.3.1. One Parameter to Describe it All
In several areas, one measure or one parameter is employed to represent a
more complex situation or variability. These simplifications have enabled
several stages or the method, but also represent a limitation. These one-for-all
limitations are discussed next:
Ψ Damage Parameter
One of the main advantages of the Ψ damage measure, that damage can be
captured in a single scalar, can also be a major limitation. A single number
cannot express the location of the damage, the direction or shape of cracks,
the number of cracks, or give insight into the cause of the damage. This crack
pattern information is lost in the scalar. This is one of the reasons that using Ψ
to compare damage from different structures subjected to different causes can
be difficult. To more reliably realise these comparisons, a second parameter
would have to be considered, perhaps including the ‘taperedness’ of the
cracks {2.4.3}. This study has focused on the increase in damage (∆Ψ) and
comparisons have been drawn between similar cases. Yet, to study the
difference between damage causes would require a more comprehensive
description of the damage included into the parameter.
Walls
Similarly, to study the effect of vibrations, walls have been used as a proxy of
more complex geometries like façades and buildings. Two distinct walls served
to study the effects of geometry on the probability of damage. In other
collaborations, more varying geometries have also been considered, though
not as extensively in terms of the variations of other parameters like soil type or
earthquake record. In these comparisons, the proxy walls seem to act well.
However, additional geometries provide a greater variability and can reveal
more intricate relationships. They are also subjected to specific failure
mechanisms that may not be common outside their particular geometry. To
consider the potential variations accurately, a large number of expensive
models would have been needed. This was unfeasible and thus remains a
limitation of this work. Moreover, the differences with models of buildings, with
3D effects and other complexities, have only been checked in parallel and must
be further quantified.

Conclusions and Outlook

269

Fired-Clay Brick
Furthermore, light damage has been studied predominantly for one material:
fired-clay brick masonry. Limited experiments have been conducted also for
calcium-silicate brick masonry but calibrations and simulations have not
considered it. While the type of fired-clay brick masonry is representative of
older, more vulnerable structures in the Netherlands, the behaviour of newer
types of masonry will differ. The conclusions drawn here, especially those that
quantify damage, are thus strictly applicable to the older masonry type. Other
masonry, with different bricks and mortars, should also be explored.
Damage on Bare Walls
The study has looked at damage in masonry. This means that connections have
not been explored. Also, damage on finishings, like plaster, paint or coatings,
which could increase the visibility of cracks, have been neglected (see
Appendix B). The connections comprise continuous or discontinuous wall-towall connections, wall-to-floors, etc.
In sum, it becomes evident that while the Ψ damage measure offers a
streamlined approach to quantifying structural damage, it inherently lacks the
depth to convey detailed damage characteristics such as location, orientation,
and specific cause. This limitation is particularly pronounced when attempting
to compare damages across different structures or damage causes, suggesting
the need for a more multifaceted approach or additional parameters. The use
of walls as a simplified proxy for more complex structures, although effective to
a degree, falls short in capturing the full spectrum of potential damage
scenarios, especially those unique to specific geometries. Furthermore, the
study's focus on a single material type limits the generalisability of its findings,
as different materials exhibit varied damage behaviours.

Furthermore, this study has focused on in-plane damage for single wythe walls.
Damage in single wythe walls is easier to track in experimental setups and to
reproduce in numerical models. Yet, many older structures possess double
wythe walls. For damage that occurs in the plane of walls, cracks are expected
to be similar between single or double wythe walls. However, these differences
should be more accurately investigated. 3D DIC or embedded fibre optics
could be used to explore crack propagation throughout the masonry thickness.
Moreover, while light damage typically occurs in the plane of the walls
(De Vent, 2011; Van Staalduinen et.al 2018), combinations with out-of-plane
actions could lead to asymmetry in crack-based damage between one face of a

Chapter 7

7.3.2. Single-Wythe Brick Walls and In-Plane Damage

270

Chapter 7

wall and the other. This effect would be especially marked in thicker double
wythe masonry. This ‘mixed mode’ of in-plane and out-of-plane effects has not
been considered in this work and remains to be further researched.

7.3.3. Quasi-static Extrapolation to Dynamic Actions
In the fourth step of the five step approach to quantify light damage,
extrapolations are made using calibrated models. The extrapolation consists of
employing the models, calibrated against the experiments, to investigate the
effects of soil movements. However, the experiments were quasi-static,
applying a slowly enforced in-plane drift, while soil movements can be
dynamic, as is the case of earthquake vibrations. A more direct approach would
have considered models calibrated against dynamic experiments.
However, dynamic tests should always be considered as supplemental since
their interpretation is more difficult than that of quasi-static tests. The dynamic
effects imparted by the setup and its interaction with the loading signal, as well
as the boundaries applied to the specimen, can significantly alter the damage
evolution in a test. For the dynamic loading to be sufficiently representative,
the test of a wall should include an inertial mass on top. Still, the dynamic
interaction of the other walls in a real structure, which will modify the way in
which a single wall is loaded, is nearly impossible to reproduce. For this reason,
accurate dynamic tests usually employ an assemblage of walls into a true
building. Then, testing a relatively large number of buildings becomes
unfeasible, unless these are scaled, which interferes with the development of
light damage and the size effect associated with softening. Moreover,
capturing damage and its propagation becomes exceedingly more problematic
during dynamic tests since damage can develop within milliseconds. In this
light, quasi-static tests offer better calibration possibilities for models
attempting to reproduce masonry cracking at the initiation stages.
Nonetheless, additional verifications are needed against dynamic tests to
confirm the accurate behaviour of the calibrated models when extrapolated to
dynamic situations.
Consequently, the observations presented here should be viewed within this
limitation. For high values of PGV (>30 mm/s), where dynamic effects can play
a more important role, the damage behaviour could differ slightly. As such, the
conclusions are better applicable for the low values of PGV, where light
damage is also expected to occur.

Conclusions and Outlook

271

7.3.4. Repetition at the Material Model
The effect of the degradation observed because of repetition in experiments is
only partly reflected in the numerical models. In the models reproducing the
test, the reduction in force levels out after three or four repetitions, while the
degradation of force in experiments reaches an asymptote after about thirty
repetitions. Since the overall decrease has been captured well, and the
propagation of damage within identical steps is correctly reflected in the
models, the calibration in terms of degradation has been deemed sufficient.
Moreover, the Damage Accumulation Function has been validated directly to
experimental results. However, repetition has proven to be influential in
damage accumulation. It is not clear to which degree the additional
degradation would modify the damage behaviour observed in this work, but it
must be highlighted as a limitation, that the material degradation observed in
experiments is not fully implemented yet in numerical models. Therefore,
additional emphasis on capturing all aspects of repetition should be a focus of
future studies.

7.4. Recommendations for Further Study
If the previous section identified specific limitations that constrain the
conclusions of this work and suggestions to address them have been made,
this section highlights additional topics that could further expand this study.

This work has focused on experiments replicating the properties of aged or
older masonry and models calibrated to their behaviour. However, modern
masonry, with joints of adhesive mortar between calcium-silicate units, or
veneers of factory-quality fired-clay bricks with cement mortars designed for a
low CO2 footprint, will have differing properties and present a distinct cracking
behaviour. Modern structures, with reinforced concrete foundations supported
by piles, are less vulnerable to static soil movements, but problems may still
arise. In particular, these structures, built with shrinkage-sensitive materials or
heavy, pre-fabricated concrete floors, are vulnerable to shrinkage cracking or
vibrations, for example. Hence, it is also important to understand the lightdamage behaviour of buildings with a more modern type of masonry; this
should be more thoroughly investigated.
Furthermore, this work has observed cracks within masonry components, but
part of the damage observed in real situations in buildings in the Netherlands,
older or newer structures, does not occur in the masonry but at discontinuous
connections between elements. These comprise for instance, the connections

Chapter 7

7.4.1. Crack-Based Damage in Modern Masonry

272

Chapter 7

between walls and floors (concrete or timber) at the ceiling or on the floor side,
or between non-structural walls and floors or walls. In some cases, structural
walls are also purposely disconnected at corners. Whether such corner cracks
can be considered damage or are part of the normal behaviour of a structure,
is still being discussed. In many cases, a flexible finishing is capable of
accommodating the normal expansion and contractions of a structure
during its daily life. Dilation joints are included in modern constructions,
accommodating thermal and hygral ‘breathing’ of the masonry.
For static or dynamic movements of somewhat greater intensity, these
connections may open up as out-of-plane or rocking cracks, or present sliding
from in-plane effects. This topic requires further study. Its main challenge would
be the great variability in types of connections and their structural behaviour. A
few MSc projects (see Appendix C) have begun a theoretical study into the
dynamic cracking of the connections between non-structural walls and ceilings
and other walls.

7.4.2. Mixed-Mode Fracture and Degradation
Degradation, when repeated actions lead to reduced material strength, was
clearly observed in experiments; see Chapter 3. The material model employed
in models (EMM) considers damage as part of the secant unloading/reloading
for cracks in tension (Mode I) and with elastic unloading/reloading and residual
shear strains in shear (Mode II). However, these effects do not seem to fully
account for the material degradation observed in the experiments. Moreover,
cracking behaviour when both modes are combined (mixed mode), a situation
that can arise due to vertical soil movements for instance, should also be
studied further both within the material modelling strategy, as with tailored
experiments specifically designed to investigate this behaviour. On the τ-σ
space, strategies for a smooth or discontinuous failure curve (or surface) exist
but a mixed-fracture energy is not clearly defined with a basis on experiments.
An improvement to the material model, based on tailored experiments and
that explicitly considers degradation and has clearer parameters for a mixed
mode situation could be further studied. The former has been partly
investigated (Bindiganavile, 2018) but an implementation that can also handle
dynamic loading is still needed. Alternatively, brick-to-brick micro models offer
promising possibilities as computational costs reduce and make them more
feasible.

Conclusions and Outlook

273

7.4.3. Monitoring Damage in the Field
This work has looked into laboratory experiments and models to investigate
damage. These have been used to estimate damage as a result from seismicity.
However, a third aspect, key in evaluating whether experiments and models
reflect the behaviour of real buildings, is monitoring in the field.
Monitoring plays a crucial role in bridging the gap between theoretical models
and the actual response of buildings to seismic events. By incorporating realtime data collection and analysis, monitoring allows for the validation and
refinement of existing models. Advanced techniques like structural health
monitoring (SHM) systems, which employ sensors to detect changes in a
building's integrity, are instrumental in this process. The behaviour observed in
experiments should also be observable in real situations. Monitoring allows for
these types of verifications. Additionally, in-situ or field tests provide real-life
tests to further enrich models and verify the results of laboratory experiments.
In this sense, monitoring is the missing third pillar in the framework of
experiments and models attempting to understand and quantify cracking in
masonry. In future research, monitoring and potential in-situ tests should be
considered to provide additional validations to insights gained in this study.

7.4.4. Strategies for Repair, Mitigation, and Adaptation

In the realm of repair strategies, various approaches can be employed
depending on the severity and type of crack-based damage in masonry. For
minor cracks, techniques such as crack injection, where an epoxy or
polyurethane resin is injected into the crack, can be effective. This not only
seals the crack but also restores the structural integrity of the masonry. For
more extensive damage however, more comprehensive methods like stitching
or rebuilding portions of the structure may be necessary. Yet, additional studies
have been recently started in the field of innovative repair strategies, such as
self-healing mortars [10]. Note that, the behaviour of repaired cracks, also
subjected to repeated loading, will have to be investigated, too.

Chapter 7

Understanding the causes of crack-based damage and accurately determining
how much damage can be expected in masonry structures can be useful for
many purposes. One of these purposes may be the development of strategies
to repair the damage. Another purpose would be the design of mitigation
solutions such that the damage is prevented in the future. Yet another is
adaptation, where new structures are built in such a way that damage is less
likely. Dilation joints are an excellent example of an adaptation measure against
thermal and shrinkage damage in masonry.

274

Chapter 7

In terms of mitigation, regular maintenance and monitoring play crucial roles.
By implementing a schedule for regular inspection and maintenance, early
signs of cracking can be detected and addressed before they develop into
significant problems. Additionally, using materials that are more resistant to
environmental factors such as temperature changes, moisture, and chemical
reactions can greatly reduce the likelihood of crack formation.
Adaptation strategies, on the other hand, focus on designing buildings with
the foresight of potential damage. This includes not only the use of dilation
joints as mentioned, but also the integration of flexible materials and advanced
design techniques such as seismic retrofitting for earthquake-prone areas.
These adaptation measures aim to make structures more resilient to the
stresses they are likely to encounter over their lifespans. Future research may
also focus in new adaptation techniques such as the use of structural glass for
in-plane strengthening of masonry structures [19].
Furthermore, advancing technology, such as the use of sensors and connected
devices, can provide real-time monitoring of structures, allowing for prompt
identification and response to any signs of distress. This integration of
technology in masonry work can revolutionise the way buildings are maintained
and safeguarded against damage. Studies into the implementation of sensors
like accelerometers, tilt-meters, embedded fibre-optic strain sensors, etc. could
be fruitful.
In conclusion, addressing crack-based damage in masonry structures requires a
multifaceted approach that encompasses repair, mitigation, and adaptation
strategies. By understanding the underlying causes and employing the right
combination of techniques, the longevity and safety of masonry structures can
be significantly enhanced.

Conclusions and Outlook

275

7.5. Outlook
The previous section looked at specific aspects or topics that should be studied
following this work. This section instead, provides a more general outlook on
the challenges surrounding building damage.

7.5.1. Climate Change and Building Fragility
Apart from gas extraction and mining, also climate change is an upcoming
threat to buildings. Climate change and building fragility may seem unrelated
at first glance. However, many effects of climate change have been
demonstrated and these indirectly affect buildings. Consider first, more
extreme weather events such as stronger wind storms, drought, heavy rainfall,
and heat waves. These alone affect buildings in several ways. Strong and more
frequent storms may damage roofs or walls. Droughts will lead to soil changes
(like drying and wetting of peat and clay) that ultimately can lead to
settlements in buildings. Heavy rainfall can saturate unprepared roofs causing
overloading, or it can lead to erosion on foundations. Similarly, quickly
changing water table levels may again lead to settlements. Heatwaves can also
cause problems with thermal expansion for buildings or infrastructure never
designed for those (rapid changes in) temperatures.
Secondly, observe the higher risk of (flash) floods due to heavy rainfall, riverine
floods, and sea level rise. The flood fragility of buildings will become ever more
relevant. Thirdly, to mitigate climate change, underground storage of carbondioxide may prove to be a viable solution; its effects at the ground surface will
need to be studied. The multi-hazard framework presented in this work may
help in this matter.

Similarly, the energy sector is transitioning from fossil-based energy to
renewable sources as part of climate-change mitigation. One of such options is
geothermal energy which requires drilling and interacting with the
underground. Other renewable sources, like wind or solar, also require energy
storage which can be achieved underground. These ground-based solutions
may have similar effects on buildings and infrastructure as mining-induced
subsidence and vibrations.
Moreover, the relationship between the energy transition and cracking can be
more straightforward. As homeowners implement insulation measures, install
photovoltaic or adiabatic solar collectors, replace old furnaces with more
efficient, hybrid or electric devices, their renovation efforts will lead to changes

Chapter 7

7.5.2. Cracking and the Energy Transition

276

Chapter 7

in buildings that should be properly conducted to avoid problems and
damage.

7.5.3. Risk Reluctance, Acceptance and Damage Policy
In the case of gas extraction in the North of the Netherlands, knowledge,
policy and communication about the effects of induced seismicity and
subsidence came too late (Palomo-Vélez et al. 2023). Public perception
regarding these issues has been overwhelmingly negative (Van der Voort &
Vanclay, 2015; Mulder & Perey, 2018). Besides the cost of repair, which affects a
limited area, the loss of property value and immaterial damage has been
greater and more widespread. Moreover, the uncertainty, especially due to lack
of clear communication, regarding the aforementioned points and in particular,
the matter of safety, has upset many. This has led to a risk-reluctant stance
where no potential effects are tolerated. The probability of damage
considered, that of just-visible cracks appearing, is comparable to that of failure
of critical flood defences of the Netherlands (1 in 10’000 yearly). In the case of
building damage due to mining activities, these probabilities are so small that
their uncertainty affects them by their order of magnitude. These policies seem
unreasonable but are the result of a society that does not accept, or has
become unaccepting, of the risks associated with mining. Perhaps this situation
is analogous to that of nuclear energy, for which there is a large risk aversion,
too.
Thus, one additional strategy for mitigation and adaptation can be noted:
acceptance. Small cracks could be accepted as normal behaviour. With the
acceptability of imperfections to a certain degree, as in many other industries,
many of the suggested measures would not be necessary.
With an outlook towards the future, work needs to be exerted into forming a
more risk-accepting society. Climate change will carry greater risk to buildings,
as problems of water management, energy, and housing, will require new
solutions. These new solutions, such as underground carbon capture or
storage, geothermal energy, more variable water table levels, etc. are not
without risk. To reduce societies’ effect on the climate and adapt to its
inevitable changes, the risk associated with these solutions will need to be
managed. Clear damage policies will give confidence that problems will be
handled fairly if they arise.

List of Publications
References in this work are cited with authors names; see Bibliography. References in
numbered squared brackets [1 - 33] are own publications or collaborations; see this
section. References in curly brackets {2.2} indicate sections within this text.

Journal Papers
1. P.A. Korswagen, M. Longo, E. Meulman, J.G. Rots (2019). Crack initiation
and propagation in unreinforced masonry specimens subjected to repeated
in-plane loading during light damage. Bulletin of Earthquake Engineering
(2019) 17:4651–4687 doi.org/10.1007/s10518-018-00553-5
2. P.A. Korswagen, S.N. Jonkman, K. Terwel (2019). Probabilistic assessment
of structural damage from coupled multi-hazards. Structural Safety Volume
76, 2019, 135-148, ISSN 0167-4730 doi.org/10.1016/j.strusafe.2018.08.001
3. P.A. Korswagen, M. Longo, J.G. Rots (2020). Calcium silicate against clay
brick masonry: an experimental comparison of the in-plane behaviour
during light damage. Bulletin of Earthquake Engineering (2020) 18:2759–
2781 doi.org/10.1007/s10518-020-00803-5
4. P.A. Korswagen, M. Longo, J.G. Rots (2020). High-resolution monitoring of
the initial development of cracks in experimental masonry shear walls and
their reproduction in finite element models. Engineering Structures 211
(2020) 110365 doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2020.110365
5. L. Jansen, P.A. Korswagen, J.D. Bricker, S. Pasterkamp, K.M. de Bruijn, S.N.
Jonkman (2020). Experimental determination of pressure coefficients for
flood loading of walls of Dutch terraced houses. Engineering Structures 216
(2020) 110647, doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2020.110647

7. P.A. Korswagen, M. Longo, J.G. Rots (2022). Fragility curves for light
damage of clay masonry walls subjected to seismic vibrations. Bull
Earthquake Eng 20, 6193–6227 (2022). doi.org/10.1007/
s10518-022-01404-0
8. A. Prosperi, P. A. Korswagen, M. Korff, R. Schipper, J. G. Rots, Empirical
fragility and ROC curves for masonry buildings subjected to settlements.
Journal of Building Engineering, 68, 106094 (2023).

Publications

6. M. Longo, M. Sousamli, P.A. Korswagen, P.C. Van Staalduinen, J.G. Rots
(2020). Three-tiered finite element approach to soil-masonry-wall
interaction for light seismic motion. Engineering Structures 245:2021.
doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2021.112847

278

List of Publications

9. A. Prosperi, M. Longo, P. A. Korswagen, M. Korff, J. G. Rots, Sensitivity
modelling with objective damage assessment of unreinforced masonry
facades undergoing different subsidence settlement patterns. Engineering
Structures, 286, 116113 (2023).
10. A. Prosperi, M. Longo, P. A. Korswagen, M. Korff, J. G. Rots, 2D and 3D
modelling strategies to reproduce the response of historical masonry
buildings subjected to settlements. International Journal of Architectural
Heritage (2024).
33. Gaggero, M. B., Korswagen, P. A., Esposito, R., & Rots, J. G. (2023). InPlane Behaviour of Unreinforced Masonry Strengthened with a Structural
Glass Window: A Proof of Concept. Buildings, 13(2), 361.
34. P. A. Korswagen, J. G. Rots, K. C. Terwel (2024). Experimentally-based inplane Drift Limits for the Upper Threshold of Masonry Light Damage.
Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics.

Conference Papers
11. P.A. Korswagen, E. Meulman, M. Longo, J.G. Rots (2018). Crack Initiation
And Propagation In Unreinforced Masonry Structures Subjected To
Repeated Load And Earthquake Vibrations. 10th International Masonry
Conference, Milan, Italy 2018
12. P. Korswagen, M. Longo, E. Meulman, J.G. Rots (2019). Experimental and
Computational Study of the Influence of Pre-Damage Patterns in
Unreinforced Masonry Crack Propagation Due to Induced, Repeated
Earthquakes. 13th North American Masonry Conference, Utah, USA 2019
13. P.A. Korswagen & J.G. Rots (2020). Older clay masonry can be more
earthquake-resistant than calcium-silicate masonry for light damage. 17th
International Brick and Block Masonry Conference (IB2MaC), Krakow,
Poland 2020
14. P.A. Korswagen & J.G. Rots (2020). Monitoring and quantifying crackbased light damage in masonry walls with Digital Image Correlation. 1st
International Conference on Structural Damage Modelling and Assessment
(SDMA), Gent, Belgium 2020
15. P.A. Korswagen, M. Longo, J.G. Rots (2020). Experimental and
computational research into the lower damage state DS1 for masonry
structures. 17th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, 17WCEE,
Sendai, Japan 2021

List of Publications

279

16. P.A. Korswagen, M. Longo, J.G. Rots (2021). Experimental and
computational study into the onset of light damage of Dutch masonry
structures. HERON Volume 66 (2021), issue 1.
17. Paul A. Korswagen, Michele Longo, Jan G. Rots, Karel C. Terwel (2023).
Sensitivity of Damage Accumulation of Masonry Walls due to Earthquake
Vibrations via Finite-Element Models. 14th North American Masonry
Conference (NAMC), Nebraska, USA 2023.
18. Francesco Messali, Rita Esposito, Samira Jafari, Geert Ravenshorst, Paul
Korswagen, Jan G. Rots (2018). A Multi-scale Experimental
Characterisation Of Dutch Unreinforced Masonry Buildings. 16th European
Conference on Earthquake Engineering. Thessaloniki, Greece, 2018.
19. Gaggero, M. B., Korswagen, P. A., Esposito, R., & Rots, J. G. (2023,
September). Innovative Application of Self-healing Technology to Masonry:
A Proof of Concept. In International Conference on Structural Analysis of
Historical Constructions (pp. 332-345). Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.
20. P. A. Korswagen, M. Longo, A. Prosperi, J. G. Rots, K. C. Terwel (2023).
Modelling of Damage in Historical Masonry Façades Subjected to a
Combination of Ground Settlement and Vibrations. In International
Conference on Structural Analysis of Historical Constructions (pp. 904-917)
(2023).
21. Maria B. Gaggero, Paul A. Korswagen, Rita Esposito, Jan G. Rots.
Exploring Bacteria-Based Self-Healing Potential in Cement-Lime Mortar
Masonry. IB2MaC, Birmingham, UK 2024.
22. A. Prosperi, M. Longo, P. A. Korswagen, M. Korff, J. G. Rots (2023),
Accurate and Efficient 2D Modelling of Historical Masonry Buildings
Subjected to Settlements in Comparison to 3D Approaches. In International
Conference on Structural Analysis of Historical Constructions (pp. 232-244)
(2023).

32. A. Prosperi, M. Longo, P. A. Korswagen, M. Korff, J. G. Rots (2023). Shape
matters: Influence of varying settlement profiles due to multicausal
subsidence when modelling damage in a masonry façade. In Tenth
International Symposium on Land Subsidence (2023).

Publications

31. Paul Korswagen, M. Belen Gaggero, Jan G. Rots (2024). Experimental
comparison of cracking in four masonry walls with different boundaries and
material. IB2MaC, Birmingham, UK 2024.

280

List of Publications

Scientific Reports
23. Korswagen, Longo, Meulman, Van Hoogdalem. (2017). Damage sensitivity
of Groningen masonry structures – Experimental and computational
studies. TU Delft Report number C31B69WP0-11, v.1.2. (Stream 1)
24. Damage sensitivity of Groningen masonry structures - Experimental and
computational studies - Stream 2
a. Korswagen, P., Longo, M., Meulman, E., (2019). Damage sensitivity of
Groningen masonry structures - Experimental and computational studies
- Stream 2 - Part 1. Report number C31B69WP0-14, Report, version 2.0,
1 of December of 2019
b. Korswagen, P., Longo, M (2019). Damage sensitivity of Groningen
masonry structures – Experimental and computational studies - Stream 2
- Part 2. Report number C31B69WP0-14-2, Report, version 1.0, 1 of
December of 2019.
25. Korswagen, P., Meulman, E., Mariani, V. (2017). Testing, Characterisation,
and Modelling of NeHoBo Floors for Groningen Seismic Assessment.
Report number C31B71WP0-1, Intermediate Report, version 3.3, January of
2018.
26. Korswagen, P., Harish, S., Oetjen, J. & Wüthrich, D. (2022). Post-flood field
survey of the Ahr Valley (Germany) - Building damages and hydraulic
aspects – TU Delft Report, 69 pages (DOI: 10.4233/uuid:3cafd772facd-4e3a-8b1a-cee978562ff1) and MetaData (DOI: 10.4121/19222656).
27. P.A. Korswagen, M. Longo, J.G. Rots, A. Prosperi (2022). Supporting
analyses to determine probability of damage and fragility curves due to
indirect subsidence effects. Delft University of Technology. Report number
00, Final Version 2, October 3, 2022.
28. Rots, J.G., Korswagen, P.A., Longo, M. (2021). Computational modelling
checks of masonry building damage due to deep subsidence. Delft
University of Technology. Report number 01, Version 05, February 18, 2021.
29. Korswagen, P., Pari, M., Rots, J.G. (2023). Fragility curves and maps for
calcium-silicate brick masonry light damage vulnerability (fragility v2).
Report number IMGWP3.3_5, Draft report, version 1.0, 31 May 2023
30. Pari, M., Korswagen, P., Rots, J.G. (2022). Calibration of Computational
models for the reproduction of damage in calcium-silicate masonry walls.
Report number IMGWP3.3_4, Intermediate draft report, version 1.1, 24th of
February 2022

Eng Bldg an Earthq-Resilient Pacific 6-8
November 2015, Sydney, Australia.
Almeida et al. (2012)
J.C. Almeida, P.B. Lourenço, J.A. Barros.
Characterisation of brick and brick–mortar
interface under uniaxial tension. Intl Seminar of
Struct Masonry for Developing Countries.
Almeida & Monteiro (1999)
J.C. Almeida, S.N. Monteiro. The Iosipescu test
method as a method to evaluate the tensile
strength of brittle materials. Polymer Testing 18
(1999) 407–414.
Anania et al. (2012)
L. Anania, C. Giaquinta, G. D'Agata. The
Reinforcement of Multiple-Leaves Masonry
Walls using Carbon Fibre Reinforced Polymer:
A Theoretical Approach. Procdngs of the
Eleventh Intl Conf on Comput Structs Tech,
BHV Topping, (Editor), Civil-Comp Press,
Stirlingshire, Scotland.
Anania et al. (2014)
L. Anania, G. D’Agata, C. Giaquinta, A. Badalà.
Out of Plane Behavior of Calcareous Masonry
Panels Strengthened by CFRP. APCBEE
Procedia 9 (2014) 401 – 406.
Anania & D’Agata (2014)
L. Anania, G. D’Agata. Performance Of a
Multiple-leaf Masonry Wall Under Eccentrical
Loads. Department of Civil Eng and
Architecture, U of Catania.
Anthoine et al. (1995)
A. Anthoine, G. Magonette, G. Magenes.
Shear-compression testing and analysis of brick
masonry walls. 10th European Conf on Earthq
Eng, Duma (ed)© 1995 Balkema, Rotterdam
ISBN 90 541o528 3.
Anthoine & Molina (2008)
A. Anthoine, F.J. Molina. Pseudo-dynamic
Testing Of Full Scale Masonry Structures:
Preparatory Work. European Laboratory for
Struct Assessment (ELSA) Joint Research
Centre of the European Commission Ispra, Italy.
Arias (1970)
A. Arias. A measure of earthquake intensity.
Hansen RJ (ed) Seismic design for nuclear
power plants MIT Press, Cambridge MA, pp
438–483.

Bibliography

Bibliography
Abo-El-Ezz et al. (2013)
A. Abo-El-Ezz, M. Nollet, M. Nastev. Seismic
fragility assessment of low-rise stone masonry
buildings. Earthq Eng & Eng Vib (2013) 1287-97.
Ademović et al. (2020)
N. Ademović, T.K. Šipoš, M. Hadzima-Nyarko.
Rapid assessment of earthquake risk for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Bull of Earthq Eng (2020)
18:1835–1863. doi.org/10.1007/
s10518-019-00775-1
AeDES (2007)
AeDES. Field Manual for post-earthquake
damage and safety assessment and short term
countermeasures. European Commission Joint Research Centre - Institute for the
Protection and Security of the Citizen.
Aguilar et al. (2016)
V. Aguilar, C. Sandoval, J.M. Adam, J. GarzónRoca, G. Valdebenito. Prediction of the shear
strength of reinforced masonry walls using a
large experimental database and artificial
neural networks. Structure and Infrastructure
Eng. doi.org/10.1080/15732479.2016.1157824
Akhaveissy (2012)
A.H. Akhaveissy. The DSC Model for the
Nonlinear Analysis of In-plane Loaded Masonry
Structures. The Open Civil Eng J, 2012, 6,
(Suppl 1-M8) 200-214.
Akhaveissy & Milani (2013)
A.H. Akhaveissy, G. Milani. A numerical model
for the analysis of masonry walls in-plane
loaded and strengthened with steel bars. Intl J
of Mech Sciences 72 (2013) 13–27.
Alberto et al. (2011)
A. Alberto, P. Antonaci, S. Valente. Damage
analysis of brick-to-mortar interfaces. Procedia
Eng 10 (2011) 1151–1156.
Aldemir et al. (2015)
A. Aldemir, B. Binici, E. Canbay, A. Yakut.
Lateral load testing of an existing two story
masonry building up to near collapse. Bull
Earthq Eng DOI. doi.org/10.1007/
s10518-015-9821-3
Allen et al. (2015)
C. Allen, M.J. Masia, A.W. Page, M.C. Griffith,
H. Derakhshan. Cyclic in-plane shear testing of
unreinforced masonry walls with openings.
Procdngs of the Tenth Pacific Conf on Earthq

282

Bibliography

Arup (2013)
in Groningen, The Netherlands. Sustainability
Arup. Groningen 2013 - Implementation Study.
2018, 10, 3621;. doi.org/10.3390/su10103621
Arup.
Bal et al. (2018)
Arup (2015)
I.E. Bal, D. Dais, E. Smyrou. "Differences"
Arup. Groningen Earthquakes Structural
Between Induced And Natural Seismic Events.
Upgrading - Site Response Analysis. ARUP.
16th European Conf on Earthq Eng,
Arup et al. (2015)
Thessaloniki 18-21 June, 2018.
Arup, Eucentre, TUDelft, Mosayk. LNECBal et al. (2021)
BUILD-1 - Modelling Predictions and Analysis
I.E. Bal, D. Dais, E. Smyrou, V. Sarhosis. Novel
Cross Validation. ARUP, 229746_0310_REP2004 invisible markers for monitoring cracks on
Issue | 8 September 2017.
masonry structures. Construction and Bldg
Arup (2016a)
Mats 300 (2021) 124013.
Arup. Groningen Earthquakes Structural
Basilio et al. (2014)
Upgrading - Martini Type K As-Built
I. Basilio, R. Fedele, P. Lourenço, G. Milani.
Assessment Report. ARUP.
Numerical and experimental analysis of full
Arup (2016b)
scale arches reinforced with GFRP materials.
Arup. Groningen Earthquakes - Structural
Key Eng Mats Online: 2014-09-12 ISSN:
Upgrading - Expert System Modelling Methods 1662-9795, Vol 624, pp 502-509. doi.org/
and Assumptions. Arup.
10.4028/www.scientific.net/KEM.624.502
Arup (2018a)
Belletti et al. (2014)
Arup. Equivalent viscous damping for secant
B. Belletti, C. Damoni, M.A.N. Hendriks, A. de
stiffness method with Draft NPR 9998:2017
Boer. Analytical and numerical evaluation of the
ground motions for unreinforced masonry
design shear resistance of reinforced concrete
building super structures. Nen, Arup.
slabs. Struct Conc 15 (2014), No 3.
Arup (2018b)
Benedetti et al. (1998)
Arup. Exposure Database (EDB) V5. ARUP
D. Benedetti, P. Carydis, P. Pezzoli. Shaking
229746_0520_REP2014 Rev009 ISSUE_DEF, 18 Table Tests On 24 Simple Masonry Buildings.
January 2018.
EARTHQUAKE ENGINEERING AND
Arya et al. (2013)
STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS, VOL 27, 67—90
A.S. Arya, T. Boen, Y. Ishiyama. Guidelines For
(1998).
Earthquake Resistant Non-engineered
Bernat et al. (2014)
Construction. United Nations Educational,
E. Bernat, P. Roca, L. Gil. Experimental study of
Scientific and Cultural Organization, 7, place de brick masonry walls strengthened with textile
Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France.
reinforced mortar. Key Eng Mats Online:
Astroza et al. (2012)
2014-09-12 ISSN: 1662-9795, Vol 624, pp
M. Astroza, O. Moroni, S. Brzev, J. Tanner.
397-404. doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/
Seismic Performance of Engineered Masonry
KEM.624.397
Buildings in the 2010 Maule Earthquake.
Beyer & Mergos (2015)
Earthq Spectra, Volume 28, No S1, pages
K. Beyer, P. Mergos. Sensitivity Of Drift
S385–S406, June 2012.
Capacities Of Urm Walls To Cumulative
Atkinson (2015)
Damage Demands And Implications On
G.M. Atkinson. Ground-Motion Prediction
Loading Protocols For Quasi-Static Cyclic Tests.
Equation for Small-to-Moderate Events at Short 12th North American Masonry Conf, Denver,
Hypocentral Distances, with Application to
Colorado May 17-20, 2015.
Induced-Seismicity Hazards. Bull of the
den Bezemer & van Elk (2018)
Seismological Soc of America, Vol 105, No 2a,
T. den Bezemer, J. van Elk. Special Report on
pp –, April 2015. doi.org/10.1785/0120140142
the Zeerijp Earthquake – 8th January 2018.
Bakema et al. (2018)
NAM.
M.M. Bakema, C. Parra, P. McCann. Analyzing
Bindiganavile-Ramadas (2018)
the Social Lead-Up to a Human-Induced
S. Bindiganavile-Ramadas. A Hyperbolic model
Disaster: The Gas Extraction-Earthquake Nexus for Degradation in Tension mode-I Fracture of

Masonry - Implementation and Validation in
Engineering masonry model. Delft U of Tech.
Bird et al. (2006)
J.F. Bird, J.J. Bommer, H. Crowley, R. Pinho.
Modelling liquefaction-induced building
damage in earthquake loss estimation. Soil
Dyns and Earthq Eng 26 (2006) 15–30.
Blaber et al. (2015)
J. Blaber, B. Adair, A. Antoniou. Ncorr- OpenSource 2D Digital Image Correlation Matlab
Software. Experimental Mechs DOI. doi.org/
10.1007/s11340-015-0009-1
Blong (2003)
R. Blong. A new Damage Index. Natural Hzrds
30: 1–23, 2003.
de Boer et al. (2016)
S.J. de Boer, A. van den Bos, J. van Es, N.
Kostense, H. Krijgsman, J. Manie, P. Meijers, R.
Ringers, R. Roijakkers, A. Verweij, C. van der
Vliet, R. Vonk, P.A. Vásconez Gutiérrez.
Guideline for NLTH Earthquake Analyses of
Existing Buildings in Groningen Performed with
DIANA FEM Software. ABT-Wassenaar,
ARCADIS, ROYAL HASKONINGDHV, TNO.
Boffi & Castellani (1988)
G. Boffi, A. Castellani. Effects of Surface Waves
on the Rotational components of earthquake
motion. Procdngs of Ninth World Conf on
Earthq Eng, 1988 Tokyo-Kyoto, Japan.
Bommer et al. (2013)
J. Bommer, H. Crowley, R. Pinho. Review of
Arup Report “Seismic Risk Study: Earthquake
Scenario-Based Risk Assessment. NAM.
Bommer et al. (2015a)
J.J. Bommer, B. Dost, B. Edwards, A.
Rodriguez-Marek, P.P. Kruiver, P. Meijers, M.
Ntinalexis, P.J. Stafford, J. van Elk, D.
Doornhof. Development of Version 2 GMPEs
for Response Spectral Accelerations and
Significant Durations from Induced Earthquakes
in the Groningen Field. NAM.
Bommer et al. (2015b)
J.J. Bommer, P.J. Stafford, B. Edwards, B. Dost,
M. Ntinalexis. Development of GMPEs for
Response Spectral Accelerations and for
Strong-Motion Durations. NAM.
Bommer et al. (2017a)
J.J. Bommer, P.J. Stafford, M. Ntinalexis.
Empirical Ground-Motion Prediction Equations
for Peak Ground Velocity from SmallMagnitude Earthquakes in the Groningen Field

283
Using Multiple Definitions of the Horizontal
Component of Motion. NAM.
Bommer et al. (2017b)
J.J. Bommer, P.J. Stafford, B. Edwards, B. Dost,
E. van Dedem, A. Rodriguez-Marek, P. Kruiver,
J.F. van Elk, D. Doornhof, M. Ntinalexis.
Framework for a Ground-Motion Model for
Induced Seismic Hazard and Risk Analysis in
the Groningen Gas Field, The Netherlands.
Earthq Spectra: May 2017, Vol 33, No 2, pp
481-498.
Bommer et al. (2017c)
J.J. Bommer, B. Dost, B. Edwards, P.P. Kruiver,
M. Ntinalexis, A. Rodriguez-Marek, P.J.
Stafford, J. van Elk. Developing a model for the
prediction of ground motions due to
earthquakes in the Groningen gas field.
Netherlands J of Geosciences — Geologie en
Mijnbouw |96 – 5 | s203–s213 | 2017.
Bommer et al. (2019)
J.J. Bommer, P.J. Stafford, M. Ntinalexis.
Updated Empirical GMPEs for PGV from
Groningen Earthquakes – March 2019. Imperial
College & NAM.
Bommer & van Elk (2017)
J.J. Bommer, J. van Elk. Comment on “The
Maximum Possible and the Maximum Expected
Earthquake Magnitude for Production-Induced
Earthquakes at the Gas Field in Groningen, The
Netherlands” by Gert Zöller and Matthias
Holschneider. Bull of the Seismological Soc of
America, Vol 107, No 3, pp 1564–1567, June
2017. doi.org/10.1785/0120170040
Bommer & MartinezPereira (1998)
J.J. Bommer, A. MartinezPereira. The
Prediction of Strong-Motion duration for
engineering design. Eleventh World Conf on
Earthq Design Paper no 84.
Boonpichetvong et al. (2004)
M. Boonpichetvong, H. Netzel, J.G. Rots.
Numerical Analyses of Soil-Foundation-Building
Interaction due to Tunnelling. 5th Intl PhD
Symp in Civil Eng - London.
Borzi et al. (2001)
B. Borzi, G.M. Calvi, A.S. Elnashai, E. Faccioli,
J.J. Bommer. Inelastic spectra for
displacement-based seismic design. Soil Dyns
and Earthq Eng 21 (2001) 47-61.
Borzi et al. (2008)
B. Borzi, R. Pinho, H. Crowley. Simplified
pushover-based vulnerability analysis for large-

Bibliography

References

284
scale assessment of RC buildings. Eng Structs
30 (2008) 804–820.
Boscardin & Cording (1989)
M.D. Boscardin, E.J. Cording. Building
response to excavation-induced settlement. J
of Geotechnical Eng, 115(1):1–21, 1989.
Bosiljkov et al. (2008)
V. Bosiljkov, A.W. Page, V. Bokan-Bosiljkov, R.
Zarnić. Evaluation of the seismic performance
of brick masonry walls. STRUCTURAL
CONTROL AND HEALTH MONITORING Struct
Control Health Monit 2010; 17:100–118
Published online 22 December 2008 in Wiley
InterScience (wwwintersciencewileycom).
doi.org/10.1002/stc.299
Boulanger & Idriss (2014)
R.W. Boulanger, I.M. Idriss. CPT and SPT based
Liquefaction Triggering Procedures. Center for
Geotechnical Modeling - Department of Civil
and Environmental Eng - U of California.
Bourne et al. (2015)
S.J. Bourne, S.J. Oates, J.J. Bommer, B. Dost,
J. van Elk, D. Doornhof. A Monte Carlo Method
for Probabilistic Hazard Assessment of Induced
Seismicity due to Conventional Natural Gas
Production. Bull of the Seismological Soc of
America, Vol 105, No 3, pp 1721–1738, June
2015. doi.org/10.1785/0120140302
Bourne et al. (2018)
S.J. Bourne, S.J. Oates, J. van Elk. The
exponential rise of induced seismicity with
increasing stress levels in the Groningen gas
field and its implications for controlling seismic
risk. Geophys J Int (2018) 213, 1693–1700.
doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggy084
Bourne & Oates (2017)
S.J. Bourne, S.J. Oates. Development of
statistical geomechanical models for
forecasting seismicity induced by gas
production from the Groningen field.
Netherlands J of Geosciences — Geologie en
Mijnbouw |96 – 5 | s175–s182 | 2017.
BouwenmetStaal (2015)
BouwenmetStaal. Aardbevingsbestendig
Ontwerpen. Bouwen met Staal.
Brzev (2019)
S. Brzev. Earthquake-Resistant Confined
Masonry - Construction. National Information
Center of Earthq Eng Indian Institute of Tech
Kanpur India.

Bibliography
Bultot et al. (2012)
E. Bultot, L.V. Parys, S. Datoussaid. Out-ofplane Behaviour of URM Walls: Experimental
studies. 9th National Congress on Theoretical
and Applied Mechs, Brussels, 9-10-11 May
2012.
Burland et al. (1977)
J.B. Burland, B.B. Broms, V.F.B.D. Mello.
Behaviour of Foundations and Structures. Bldg
Research Establishment. doi
Burland et al. (2001)
J.B. Burland, J.R. Standing, F.M. Jardine.
Building response to tunnelling Case studies
from construction of the Jubilee Line Extension,
London. CIRIA Special Publication 200.
Burland & Wroth (1974)
J.B. Burland, C.P. Wroth. Settlement of
buildings and associated damage. Procdngs of
Conf on Settlement of Structs, pages 611–654,
Cambridge, 1974 Pentech Press.
Burnett et al. (2007)
S. Burnett, M. Gilbert, T. Molyneaux, G.
Beattie, B. Hobbs. The performance of
unreinforced masonry walls subjected to lowvelocity impacts: Finite element analysis. Intl J
of Impact Eng 34 (2007) 1433–1450.
CUR et al. (1990)
CUR, Jansen, J.G. Rots, Walraven. Pre-advice
Computational Masonry Mechanics, final report
CUR committee PA33 'Masonry Mechanics'.
CUR, Gouda, 1990, CUR-report-90-6.
Calderini et al. (2008)
C. Calderini, S. Cattari, S. Lagomarsino. Inplane strength of unreinforced masonry piers.
Earthq Engng Struct Dyn 2009; 38:243–267.
Calderini et al. (2015)
C. Calderini, S.D. Abbati, P. Cotič, M. Kržan, V.
Bosiljkov. In-plane shear tests on masonry
panels with plaster: correlation of structural
damage and damage on artistic assets. Bull
Earthq Eng (2015) 13:237–256 DOI. doi.org/
10.1007/s10518-014-9632-y
Calduran (2004)
Calduran. Kalkzandsteen Dilatatierichtlijnen.
Calduran Kalkzandsteen Bouwtechniek en
Voorlichting.
Calvi et al. (2006)
G.M. Calvi, R. Pinho, G. Magenes, J.J. Bommer,
L.F. Restrepo-Vélez, H. Crowley. Development
Of Seismic Vulnerability Assessment
Methodologies Over The Past 30 Years. ISET J

285

of Earthq Tech, Paper No 472, Vol 43, No 3,
Causevic & Mitrovic (2010)
September 2006, pp 75-104.
M. Causevic, S. Mitrovic. Comparison between
Calvi & Kingsley (1996)
non-linear dynamic and static seismic analysis
G.M. Calvi, G.R. Kingsley. Problems and
of structures according to European and US
certainties in the experimental simulation of the provisions. Bull Earthq Eng DOI. doi.org/
seismic response of MDOF structures.
10.1007/s10518-010-9199-1
EngStructs,Vol 18, No 3, pp 213-226, 1996.
Ceran & Erberik (2013)
Cannizzaro et al. (2018)
H.B. Ceran, M.A. Erberik. Effect of out-of-plane
F. Cannizzaro, B. Pantò, S. Caddemi, I. Caliò. A
behavior on seismic fragility of masonry
Discrete Macro-Element Method (DMEM) for
buildings in Turkey. Bull Earthq Eng (2013)
the nonlinear structural assessment of masonry
11:1775–1795 DOI. doi.org/10.1007/
arches. Eng Structs 168 (2018) 243–256.
s10518-013-9449-0
doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2018.04.006
Chacko et al. (2018)
Casapulla et al. (2016)
J. Chacko, A. Giannakou, V. Drosos, P.
C. Casapulla, L.U. Argiento, F.d. Porto, D.
Tasiopoulou. Evaluation of LiquefactionBonaldo. The relevance of frictional resistances
Induced Settlements of typical Residential
in out-of-plane mechanisms of block masonry
Buildings on Shallow Foundations Groningen,
structures. Procdngs of the 16th Intl Brick and
The Netherlands. Nam.
Block Masonry Conf, Padova, Italy, 26-30 June Chaimoon & Attard (2009)
2016.
K. Chaimoon, M.M. Attard. Experimental and
Casapulla & Argiento (2016)
numerical investigation of masonry under
C. Casapulla, L.U. Argiento. The comparative
three-point bending (in-plane). Eng Structs 31
role of friction in local out-of-plane mechanisms (2009) 103–112.
of masonry buildings. Pushover analysis and
Chong (1993)
experimental investigation. Eng Structs 126
V.L. Chong. The Behaviour Of Laterally Loaded
(2016) 158–173.
Masonry Panels With Openings. School Of Civil
Casapulla & Portioli (2015)
and Struct Eng U Of Plymouth.
C. Casapulla, F. Portioli. Experimental
Chopra & Goel (1999)
investigation on the torsion- shear interaction
A.K. Chopra, R.K. Goel. Capacity-Demandbetween stone blocks in frictional contact. WIT
Diagram Methods for Estimating Seismic
Transactions on the Built Environment · July
Deformation of Inelastic Structures: SDF
2015.
Systems. Pacific Earthq Eng Research Center Castellani & Boffi (1986)
College of Eng U of California, Berkeley.
A. Castellani, G. Boffi. Rotational components
Chuang et al. (2004)
of the surface ground motion during an
S. Chuang, Y. Zhuge, P.C. McBean. Seismic
earthquake. Earthq engineering and structural
Retrofitting Of Unreinforced Masonry Walls By
dynamics vol 14, 751-767.
Cable System. 13th World Conf on Earthq Eng
Castellazzi et al. (2017)
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
G. Castellazzi, A.M. D’Altri, S. de Miranda, A.
Chummar (1984)
Chiozzi, A. Tralli. Numerical insights on the
A.V. Chummar. Excessive Settlement in
seismic behaviour of a non- isolated historical
Buildings. Intl Conf on Case Histories in
masonry tower. Bull Earthq Eng DOI. doi.org/
Geotechnical - Eng Paper 17.
10.1007/s10518-017-0231-6
Chung & Park (2016)
Caudron et al. (2008)
L. Chung, T. Park. Evaluation of Natural
M. Caudron, M. Al Heib, F. Emeriault. Collapses Frequency Through Measurement of Ambient
of underground cavities and soil-structure
Vibration for Wall-type RC Structures. J of Asian
interactions - influences of the position of the
Architecture and Bldg Eng/May 2016/301.
structure relative to the cavity. Intl Association
Colangelo (2015)
for Computer Methods and Advcs in
F. Colangelo. On the code-compliant
Geomechanics (IACMAG). doi
verification of seismic damage to non-structural

Bibliography

References

286
masonry infills. Bull Earthq Eng (2015) 13:2051–
2072 DOI. doi.org/10.1007/s10518-014-9704-z
Mine Subsidence Engineering Consultants
(2007)
M.S.E. Mine Subsidence Engineering
Consultants. Mine Subsidence Damage to
Building Structures. Revision A. doi
Cornelissen et al. (1986)
H.A.W. Cornelissen, D.A. Hordijk, H.W.
Reinhardt. Experimental determination of crack
softening characteristic of normal weight and
lightweight concrete. Heron 31 (2), 45-56.
Correia et al. (2018)
A.A. Correia, U. Tomassetti, A. Campos-Costa,
A. Penna, G. Magenes, F. Graziotti. Collapse
Shake-table Test On a Urm-timber Roof
Substructure. 16th european conference on
Earthq engineering, Thessaloniki.
Costa et al. (2007)
A.A. Costa, A. Arêde, A. Costa. Experimental
Tests On Masonry Structures: From the
Simplest In-situ Test To Complex Lab Test
Setups. 2nd Intl Conf on Advcs in Experimental
Struct Eng Tongji Univ, Shanghai 200092,
China.
Costa et al. (2012a)
A.A. Costa, A. Arêde, A. Costa, C. SousaOliveira. Out-of-plane behaviour of existing
stone masonry buildings: experimental
evaluation. Bull Earthq Eng (2012) 10:93–111
DOI. doi.org/10.1007/s10518-011-9332-9
Costa et al. (2012b)
A. Costa, A. Arêde, F. Garcia, A.A. Costa, C.
Quintela, C.S. Oliveira. Out-of-Plane Cyclic
Experimental Testing of Traditional Stone
Masonry Walls with Distributed Loads. 15
Wcee.
Costley & Abrams (1996)
A.C. Costley, D.P. Abrams. Dynamic Response
of Unreinforced Masonry Buildings with
Flexible Diaphragms. Technical Report
NCEER-96-0001, U of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign.
Crammond et al. (2013)
G. Crammond, S.W. Boyd, J.M. Dulieu-Barton.
Speckle pattern quality assessment for digital
image correlation. Optics and Lasers in Eng 51
(2013) 1368–1378.
Crowley et al. (2004)
H. Crowley, R. Pinho, J.J. Bommer. A
Probabilistic Displacement-based Vulnerability

Bibliography
Assessment Procedure for Earthquake Loss
Estimation. Bull of Earthq Eng 2- 173–219,
2004.
Crowley et al. (2015)
H. Crowley, R. Pinho, B. Polidoro, P. Stafford.
Development of v2 Partial Collapse Fragility
and Consequence Functions for the Groningen
Field. NAM.
Crowley et al. (2017a)
H. Crowley, R. Pinho, B. Polidoro, J. van Elk.
Developing fragility and consequence models
for buildings in the Groningen field.
Netherlands J of Geosciences — Geologie en
Mijnbouw |96 – 5 | s247–s257 | 2017.
Crowley et al. (2017b)
H. Crowley, B. Polidoro, R. Pinho, J. van Elk.
Framework for Developing Fragility and
Consequence Models for Local Personal Risk.
Earthq Spectra · August 2017. doi.org/
10.1193/083116EQS140M
Crowley et al. (2018)
H. Crowley, R. Pinho, J. Van Elk, J. Uilenreef.
Probabilistic damage assessment of buildings
due to induced seismicity. Bull of Earthq Eng.
doi.org/10.1007/s10518-018-0462-1
Crowley et al. (2019)
H. Crowley, R. Pinho, F. Cavalieri. Report on the
v6 Fragility and Consequence Models for the
Groningen Field. Nam.
Curtin et al. (2008)
Curtin, Shaw, Beck, Bray, Easterbrook.
Structural masonry designers' manual.. John
Wiley & Sons.
Custer (2015)
R. Custer. Hierarchical Modelling of Flood Risk
for Engineering Decision Analysis. Technical U
of Denmark Department of Civil Eng.
Dalgic et al. (2023)
K.D. Dalgic, B. Gulen, Y. Liu, S. Acikgoz, H.
Burd, M. Marasli, A. Ilki. Masonry buildings
subjected to settlements: Half-scale testing,
detailed measurements, and insights into
behaviour. Eng Structs 278 (2023) 115233.
doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2022.115233
Damiola et al. (2018)
M. Damiola, R. Esposito, F. Messali, J.G. Rots.
Quasi-Static Cyclic Two-Way Out-Of-Plane
Bending Tests And Analytical Models
Comparison For Urm Walls. 10th Intl Masonry
Conf, Milan.

DeJong et al. (2009)
M.J. DeJong, B. Belletti, M.A.N. Hendriks, J.G.
Rots. Shell elements for sequentially linear
analysis: Lateral failure of masonry structures.
Eng Structs 31 (2009) 1382–1392.
DeSantis et al. (2016)
S. DeSantis, P. Casadei, G. DeCanio, G.
deFelice, M. Malena, M. Mongelli, I. Roselli.
Seismic performance of masonry walls
retrofitted with steel reinforced grout. Earthq
Engng Struct Dyn 2016; 45:229–251.
Debailleux (2019)
L. Debailleux. Suggested Method for the
Determination of the Weathering Index of
Ancient Fired Clay Bricks. 13th North American
Masonry Conf, SLC, Utah.
Deckner (2013)
F. Deckner. Ground vibrations due to pile and
sheet pile driving – influencing factors,
predictions and measurements. KTH Royal
Institute of Tech.
Degée et al. (2008)
H. Degée, V. Denoel, P. Candeias, A. CamposCosta, E. Coelho. Experimental investigations
on non-engineered masonry houses in low to
moderate seismicity areas. The 14 World Conf
on Earthq Eng, China.
Dempsey & Suckale (2017)
D. Dempsey, J. Suckale. Physics-based
forecasting of induced seismicity at Groningen
gas field, the Netherlands. Geophys Res Lett,
44, 7773–7782. doi.org/
10.1002/2017GL073878.
Derakhshan (2011)
H. Derakhshan. Seismic Assessment of Out-ofPlane Loaded Unreinforced Masonry Walls. The
U of Auckland Department of Civil and
Environmental Eng New Zealand.
Derakhshan et al. (2013a)
H. Derakhshan, M.C. Griffith, J.M. Ingham.
Airbag testing of multi-leaf unreinforced
masonry walls subjected to one-way bending.
Eng Structs 57 (2013) 512–522.
Derakhshan et al. (2013b)
H. Derakhshan, M.C. Griffith, J.M. Ingham.
Out-of-Plane Behavior of One-Way Spanning
Unreinforced Masonry Walls. J Eng Mech
2013139:409-417.
Derakhshan et al. (2018a)
H. Derakhshan, W. Lucas, P. Visintin, M.C.
Griffith. Out-of-plane Strength of Existing Two-

287
way Spanning Solid and Cavity Unreinforced
Masonry Walls. Structs 13 (2018) 88–101.
Derakhshan et al. (2018b)
H. Derakhshan, Y. Nakamura, H. Goldsworthy,
K.Q. Walsh, J.M. Ingham, M.C. Griffith. Peak
Floor Accelerations in Unreinforced Masonry
Buildings With Flexible Diaphragms. 10amc.
Dhanasekar et al. (2019)
M. Dhanasekar, P. Prasad, J. Dorji, T. Zahra.
Serviceability Assessment of Masonry Arch
Bridges Using Digital Image Correlation. J
Bridge Eng, 2019, 24(2): 04018120.
Didier et al. (2017)
M. Didier, G. Abbiati, M. Broccardo, K. Beyer,
L. Danciu, M. Petrović, N. Mojsilović, B.
Stojadinović. Quantification of Non-Structural
Damage in Unreinforced Masonry Walls
Induced by Geothermal Reservoir Exploration
using Quasi-Static Cyclic Tests. Procdngs of the
13th Canadian Masonry Symp, Halifax, Canada,
June 2017.
Didier et al. (2018)
M. Didier, G. Abbiati, F. Hefti, M. Broccardo, B.
Stojadinovic. Damage Quantification In
Plastered Unreinforced Masonry Walls Using
Digital Image Correlation. 10th Australasian
Masonry Conf, 14-18 February, 2018.
Dizhur et al. (2010)
D. Dizhur, N. Ismail, C. Knox, R. Lumantarna,
J.M. Ingham. Performance Of Unreinforced and
Retrofitted Masonry Buildings During the 2010
Darfield Earthquake. BULLETIN OF THE NEW
ZEALAND SOCIETY FOR EARTHQUAKE
ENGINEERING, Vol 43, No 4, December 2010.
Dizhur et al. (2011)
D. Dizhur, J. Ingham, L. Moon, M. Griffith, A.
Schultz, I. Senaldi, G. Magenes, J. Dickie, S.
Lissel, J. Centeno, C. Ventura, J. Leite, P.
Lourenco. Performance of masonry buildings
and churches in the 22 February 2011
Christchurch earthquake. BULLETIN OF THE
NEW ZEALAND SOCIETY FOR EARTHQUAKE
ENGINEERING, Vol 44, No 4, December 2011.
Dizhur et al. (2014)
D. Dizhur, M. Griffith, J. Ingham. Out-of-plane
strengthening of unreinforced masonry walls
using near surface mounted fibre reinforced
polymer strips. Eng Structs 59 (2014) 330–343.
Dizhur et al. (2017)
D.Y. Dizhur, M. Giaretton, I. Giongo, J.M.
Ingham. Seismic Retrofit Of Masonry Walls

Bibliography

References

288

Bibliography

Using Timber Strong-walls. J of the Struct Eng D’Altri et al. (2017)
Soc of New Zealand Inc, Vol 30 No 2.
A.M. D’Altri, G. Castellazzi, S. de Miranda, A.
Doherty (2000)
Tralli. Seismic-induced damage in historical
K.T. Doherty. An investigation of the weak links
masonry vaults: A case-study in the 2012 Emilia
in the seismic load path of unreinforces
earthquake-stricken area. J of Bldg Eng 13
masonry buildigs. Department of Civil and
(2017) 224–243.
Environmental Eng, The U of Adelaide,
Edwards et al. (2019)
Australia.
B. Edwards, B. Zurek, E. van Dedem, P.J.
Doherty et al. (2002)
Stafford, S. Oates, J. van Elk, B. deMartin, J.J.
K. Doherty, M.C. Griffith, N. Lam, J. Wilson.
Bommer. Simulations for the development of a
Displacement-based seismic analysis for out-of- ground motion model for induced seismicity in
plane bending of unreinforced masonry walls.
the Groningen gas field, The Netherlands. Bull
EARTHQUAKE ENGINEERING AND
of Earthq Eng (2019) 17:4441–4456. doi.org/
STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS Earthq Engng Struct
10.1007/s10518-018-0479-5
Dyn 2002; 31:833–850 (. doi.org/10.1002/
El-Dakhakhni et al. (2013)
eqe.126)
W.W. El-Dakhakhni, B.R. Banting, S.C. Miller.
Dolatshahi et al. (2015)
Seismic Performance Parameter Quantification
K.M. Dolatshahi, A.J. Aref, A.S. Whittaker.
of Shear-Critical Reinforced Concrete Masonry
Interaction Curves for In-Plane and Out-ofSquat Walls. J Struct Eng, 2013, 139(6):
Plane Behaviors of Unreinforced Masonry Walls. 957-973.
J of Earthq Eng, 19:60–84, 2015.
ElGawady et al. (2005)
Dolatshahi & Aref (2011)
M.A. ElGawady, P. Lestuzzi, M. Badoux. Seismic
K.M. Dolatshahi, A.J. Aref. Three Dimensional
performance of URM walls retrofitted using
Modeling of Masonry Structures and Interaction FRP. NZSEE Conf.
of In-Plane and Out-of-Plane Deformation of
ElGawady et al. (2006)
Masonry Walls. Eng Mechs Institute Conf
M.A. ElGawady, P. Lestuzzi, M. Badoux.
(EMI2011).
Aseismic retrofitting of unreinforced masonry
Dolšek & Fajfar (2008)
walls using FRP. Composites: Part B 37 (2006)
M. Dolšek, P. Fajfar. The effect of masonry infills 148–162.
on the seismic response of a four-storey
ElGawady et al. (2016)
reinforced concrete frame — a deterministic
M.A. ElGawady, P. Lestuzzi, M. Badoux.
assessment. Eng Structs 30 (2008) 1991–2001.
Retrofitting of Masonry Walls Using Shotcrete.
Dost et al. (2013)
2006 NZSEE Conf.
B. Dost, M. Caccavale, T. van Eck, D.
Elenas (2000)
Kraaijpoel. Report on the expected PGV and
A. Elenas. Correlation between seismic
PGA values for induced earthquakes in the
acceleration parameters and overall structural
Groningen area. KNMI.
damage indices of buildings. Soil Dyns and
Dost & Kraaijpoel (2012)
Earthq Eng 20 (2000) 93±100.
B. Dost, D. Kraaijpoel. The August 2012
Van Elk et al. (2017)
earthquake near Huizinge. KNMI.
J. Van Elk, J. Uilenreef, D. Doornhof.
Dungca et al. (2016)
Methodology Prognosis of Building Damage
J.R. Dungca, D.Y. Acosta, M.B. Juego, Sanches and Study and Data Acquisition Plan for
H., Sanches I.. The Propagation Behavior Of
Building Damage. Nam © Ep201701249834.
Pile-Driving-Induced Vibration Done On Soil At van Elk et al. (2019)
Varying Distances And Its Effects On Existing
J.F. van Elk, S.J. Bourne, S.J. Oates, J.J.
Structures. Intl J of GEOMATE, May, 2016, Vol
Bommer, R. Pinho, H. Crowley. A Probabilistic
10, Issue 21, pp 1877-1883.
Model to Evaluate Options for Mitigating
D’Altri (2017)
Induced Seismic Risk. Earthq Spectra · January
A.M. D’Altri. A Computational 3D Model For
2019. doi.org/10.1193/050918EQS118M
In-Plane And Out-Of-Plane Analysis Of
van Elk & Doornhof (2019a)
Masonry Structures. U of Bologna.
J. van Elk, D. Doornhof. Study and Data

Acquisition Plan Induced Seismicity in
Groningen. Nam.
van Elk & Doornhof (2019b)
J. van Elk, D. Doornhof. Special Report on the
Westerwijtwerd Earthquake 22nd May 2019.
Nam.
Ellsworth & McGarr (2016)
W.L. Ellsworth, A.F. McGarr. Review of “Hazard
and Risk Assessment for Induced Seismicity in
Groningen – Update 7th November 2015”.
USGS.
Elmenshawi et al. (2010)
A.E. Elmenshawi, M. Sorour, A. Mufti, L.G.
Jaeger, N. Shrive. In-plane Seismic Behaviour
of Historic Stone Masonry. Canadian J of Civil
Eng, 37(3): 465–476.
Erdal (2010)
M. Erdal. Improving out-of-plane strength and
ductility of unreinforced masonry walls in lowrise buildings by centrally applied FRP strip.
nternational J of the Physical Sciences Vol 5 (2),
pp 116-131, February, 2010.
Esposito et al. (2016)
R. Esposito, F. Messali, J.G. Rots. Tests For the
Characterization Of Replicated Masonry and
Wall Ties. C31B60 TU Delft.
Esposito et al. (2017)
R. Esposito, K. Terwel, G.J.P. Ravenshorst, H.R.
Schipper, F. Messali, J.G. Rots. Cyclic pushover
test on an unreinforced masonry structure
reseambling a typical Dutch terraced house.
16th World Conf on Earthq Eng: Santiago,
Chile.
Esposito et al. (2018)
R. Esposito, S. Jafari, G.J.P. Ravenshorst, H.R.
Schipper, J.G. Rots. Influence Of The Behaviour
Of Calcium Silicate Brick And Element Masonry
On The Lateral Capacity Of Structures. 10th
australasian masonry conference, sydney
australia.
Esposito et al. (2019)
R. Esposito, F. Messali, G.J.P. Ravenshorst, H.R.
Schipper, J.G. Rots. Seismic assessment of a
lab-tested two-storey unreinforced masonry
Dutch terraced house. Bull Earthq Eng 17,
4601–4623 (2019). doi.org/10.1007/
s10518-019-00572-w
Esposito & Ravenshorst (2017)
R. Esposito, G. Ravenshorst. Quasi-static Cyclic
In-plane Tests On Masonry Components

289
2016/2017. Delft U of Tech Report number
C31B67WP3-4, version 1, 10 August 2017.
Evangeliou (2016)
P. Evangeliou. Probabilistic nonlinear finite
element analysis of reinforced concrete beams
without shear reinforcement. TU Delft.
Ewing & Kowalsky (2004)
B.D. Ewing, M.J. Kowalsky. Compressive
Behavior of Unconfined and Confined Clay
Brick Masonry. J Struct Eng, 2004, 130(4):
650-661.
FEMA (2000)
FEMA. Pre-Standard and Commentary for the
Seismic Rehabilitation of Buildings. FEMA.
FEMA (2012)
FEMA. Hazus MH 2.1. FEMA.
FEMA (2013)
FEMA. Hazus MH MR5. FEMA.
Farhidzadeh et al. (2013)
A. Farhidzadeh, E. Dehghan-Niri, A. Moustafa,
S. Salamone, A. Whittaker. Damage
Assessment of Reinforced Concrete Structures
Using Fractal Analysis of Residual Crack
Patterns. Experimental Mechs (2013) 53:1607–
1619. 10.1007/s11340-013-9769-7
Farrell et al. (2014)
R. Farrell, R. Mair, A. Sciotti, A. Pigorini.
Building response to tunnelling. Soils and
Foundations 2014; 54(3):269–279.
Fathy et al. (2008)
A.M. Fathy, J. Planas, J.M. Sancho. A numerical
study of masonry Cracks II. Anales de Mecánica
de la Fractura 25, Vol 1 (2008).
Feenstra et al. (1998)
P.H. Feenstra, J.G. Rots, A. Arnesen, J.G.
Teigen, K.V. Hoiseth. A 3D constitutive model
for concrete based on a co-rotational concept.
Proc Euro-C Conf Comput Modelling of Conc
Structs, Balkema.
Fema (2020)
Fema. A Practical Guide to Soil-Structure
Interaction. Fema P-2091. doi
Ferreira et al. (2015)
T.M. Ferreira, A.A. Costa, A. Costa. Analysis of
the Out-of-Plane seismic behaviour of
unreinforced masonry: a literature review. Intl J
of Architectural Heritage 9, 949-942.
Ferretti et al. (2018a)
F. Ferretti, C. Mazzotti, R. Esposito, J.G. Rots.
Shear-sliding behavior of masonry: numerical
micro-modeling of triplet tests. Delft U of Tech.

Bibliography

References

290
Ferretti et al. (2018b)
F. Ferretti, S. Jafari, R. Esposito, J.G. Rots, C.
Mazzotti. Investigation of the shear-sliding
behavior of masonry through shove test:
experimental and numerical studies. SAHC.
Ferris & Tin-Loi (2001)
M.C. Ferris, F. Tin-Loi. Limit analysis of frictional
block assemblies as a mathematical program
with complementarity constraints. Intl J of
Mech Sciences 43 (2001) 209}224.
Fiore et al. (2012)
A. Fiore, A. Netti, P. Monaco. The influence of
masonry infill on the seismic behaviour of RC
frame buildings. Eng Structs 44 (2012) 133–
145.
Fiore et al. (2014)
A. Fiore, G.C. Marano, D. Laucelli, P. Monaco.
Evolutionary Modeling to Evaluate the Shear
Behavior of Circular Reinforced Concrete
Columns. Advcs in Civil Eng Volume 2014,
Article ID 684256. doi.org/
10.1155/2014/684256
Foraboschi (2009)
P. Foraboschi. Coupling effect between
masonry spandrels and piers. Material and
Structs, 42, 279-300.
Forbes & Camp (2013)
R.H. Forbes, W.M. Camp. Settlement &
Vibration Monitoring for Transmission Line
Foundation Installation. S&ME, NCDOT Conf.
Forrest (1999)
J.A. Forrest. Modelling of Ground Vibration
from Underground Railways. U of Cambridge.
Franchin et al. (2009)
P. Franchin, P.E. Pinto, P. Rajeev. Confidence in
the Confidence Factor. Eurocode 8
Perspectives from the Italian Standpoint Workshop, 25-38, Doppiavoce, Napoli, Italy.
Friedland (2009)
C.J. Friedland. Residential Building Damage
From Hurricane Storm Surge: Proposed
Methodologies To Describe, Assess And Model
Building Damage. The Department of Civil and
Environmental Eng, Louisiana State U.
Fuente et al. (2010)
J.V. Fuente, R. Fernandez, V. Albert. Brick
masonry elastic modulus determination using
the numerical simulation and experiments of
sonic wave propagation. Simulation in NDT
Online Workshop in wwwndtnet in September
2010.

Bibliography
Gams et al. (2014)
M. Gams, M. Tomazevic, A. Kwiecien.
Strengthening brick masonry by repointing – an
experimental study. Key Eng Mats Online:
2014-09-12 ISSN: 1662-9795, Vol 624, pp
444-452.
Ganz & Thürlimann (1984)
H. Ganz, B. Thürlimann. Versuche an
Mauerwerksscheiben unter Normalkraft und
Querkraft. Institut für Baustatik und
Konstruktion, ETH Zürich; Nr 7502-4,
Birkhäuser Verlag Basel ISBN 3-7643-1665-9.
García-Macías & Ubertini (2019)
E. García-Macías, F. Ubertini. Seismic
interferometry for earthquake-induced damage
identification in historic masonry towers. Mech
Systems and Signal Processing 132 (2019) 380–
404.
Gattesco et al. (2016)
N. Gattesco, L. Macorini, A. Dudine.
Experimental Response of Brick-Masonry
Spandrels under In-Plane Cyclic Loading. ASCE
J of Struct Eng Vol 142, Issue 2 (February
2016).
Del Gaudio et al. (2017)
C. Del Gaudio, M.T. De Risi, P. Ricci, G.M.
Verderame. Drift-based fragility functions for
hollow clay masonry infills in RC buildings
under in-plane seismic actions. Anidis, 2017,
Pistoia.
Gazetas (1991)
G. Gazetas. Formulas and Charts For
Impedances Of Surface and Embedded
Foundations. J of Geotechnical Eng, Vol 117,
No 9, September, 1991 ©ASCE, ISSN
0733-941O/91/0O09-1363.
Gehl et al. (2013)
P. Gehl, D.M. Seyedi, J. Douglas. Vector-valued
fragility functions for seismic risk evaluation.
Bull Earthq Eng (2013) 11:365–384 -DOI.
doi.org/10.1007/s10518-012-9402-7
Gehri et al. (2020)
N. Gehri, J. Mata-Falcón, W. Kaufmann.
Automated crack detection and measurement
based on digital image correlation.
Construction and Bldg Mats 256 (2020)
119383.
Ghandil & Behnamfar (2015)
M. Ghandil, F. Behnamfar. The near-field
method for dynamic analysis of structures on
soft soils including inelastic soil–structure

interaction. Soil Dyns and Earthq Eng 75 (2015)
1–17.
Ghobarah & Mandooh-Galal (2004)
A. Ghobarah, K.E. Mandooh-Galal. Out-ofPlane Strengthening of Unreinforced Masonry
Walls with Openings. J Compos Constr, 2004,
8(4): 298-305.
Ghorbani et al. (2015)
R. Ghorbani, F. Matta, M.A. Sutton. Full-Field
Deformation Measurement and Crack Mapping
on Confined Masonry Walls Using Digital
Image Correlation. Experimental Mechs (2015)
55:227–243.
Giardina et al. (2008)
G. Giardina, M.A.N. Hendriks, J.G. Rots.
Numerical analyses of tunnel-induced
settlement damage to a masonry wall. 7th fib
PhD Symp in Stuttgart, Germany.
Giardina et al. (2012)
G. Giardina, A. Marini, M.A.N. Hendriks, J.G.
Rots, F. Rizzardini, G. Giuriani. Experimental
analysis of a masonry façade subject to
tunnelling-induced settlement. Eng Structs 45
(2012) 421–434.
Giardina et al. (2013a)
G. Giardina, A.V. van de Graaf, M.A.N.
Hendriks, J.G. Rots, A. Marini. Numerical
analysis of a masonry façade subject to
tunnelling-induced settlements. Eng Structs 54
(2013) 234–247.
Giardina et al. (2013b)
G. Giardina, J.G. Rots, M.A.N. Hendriks.
Modelling of Settlement Induced Building
Damage. TU Delft.
Giardina et al. (2015a)
G. Giardina, M.A.N. Hendriks, J.G. Rots.
Sensitivity study on tunnelling induced damage
to a masonry façade. Eng Structs 89 (2015)
111–129.
Giardina et al. (2015b)
G. Giardina, M.J. DeJong, R.J. Mair. Interaction
between surface structures and tunnelling in
sand: Centrifuge and computational modelling.
Tunnelling and Underground Space Tech 50
(2015) 465–478.
Giaretton et al. (2015)
M. Giaretton, D. Dizhur, C. Qian, F.d. Porto, J.
Ingham. Dynamic behaviour of seismically
retrofitted clay brick masonry cavity walls.
Procdngs of the Tenth Pacific Conf on Earthq

291
Eng Bldg an Earthq-Resilient Pacific 6-8
November 2015, Sydney, Australia.
Giaretton et al. (2016a)
M. Giaretton, K. Walsh, D. Dizhur, F. daPorto, J.
Ingham. Retrofitting URM cavity walls for outof-plane composite behaviour. Brick and Block
Masonry – Trends, Innovations and Challenges
– Modena, da Porto & Valluzzi (Eds).
Giaretton et al. (2016b)
M. Giaretton, D. Dizhur, J.M. Ingham. Shaking
table testing of as-built and retrofitted clay
brick URM cavity-walls. Eng Structs 125 (2016)
70–79.
Giaretton et al. (2016c)
M. Giaretton, D. Dizhur, F. daPorto, J.M.
Ingham. Construction Details and Observed
Earthquake Performance of Unreinforced Clay
Brick Masonry Cavity-walls. Structs 6 (2016)
159–169.
Gilbert et al. (2002)
M. Gilbert, B. Hobbs, T.C.K. Molyneaux. The
performance of unreinforced masonry walls
subjected to low-velocity impacts: experiments.
Intl J of Impact Eng 27 (2002) 231–251.
Gill & Malamud (2014)
J.C. Gill, B.D. Malamud. Reviewing and
visualizing the interactions of natural hazards.
Rev Geophys, 52, 680–722. doi.org/
10.1002/2013RG000445
Gilstrap & Dolan (1998)
J.M. Gilstrap, C.W. Dolan. Out-of-plane
Bending Of Frp-reinforced Masonry Walls.
Composites Science and Tech 58 (1998)
1277-1284.
Giongo et al. (2014)
I. Giongo, A. Wilson, D.Y. Dizhur, H.
Derakhshan, R. Tomasi, M.C. Griffith, P.
Quenneville, J.M. Ingham. Detailed Seismic
Assessment And Improvement Procedure For
Vintage Flexible Timber Diaphragms. Bull Of
The New Zealand Soc For Earthq Eng, Vol 47,
No 2, June 2014.
Giongo et al. (2019)
I. Giongo, D. Dizhur, R. Tomasi, J.M. Ingham.
In-plane assessment of existing timber
diaphragms in URM buildings via quasi-static
and dynamic in-situ tests. . doi.org/10.4028/
www.scientific.net/AMR.778.495
Giusto et al. (2024)
S. Giusto, S. Cattari, S. Lagomarsino.
Investigating the Reliability of Nonlinear Static

Bibliography

References

292
Procedures for the Seismic Assessment of
Existing Masonry Buildings. Appl Sci 2024, 14,
1130. doi.org/10.3390/app14031130
Godio et al. (2019)
M. Godio, F. Vanin, S. Zhang, K. Beyer. Quasistatic shear-compression tests on stone
masonry walls with plaster: Influence of load
history and axial load ratio. Eng Structs 192
(2019) 264–278.
Grant et al. (2015)
D. Grant, G. Magenes, J. Rots, J. Van Elk, D.
Doornhof. Groningen Earthquakes – Structural
Upgrading - URM Modelling and Analysis
Cross- Validation. Nam.
Graziotti et al. (2015)
F. Graziotti, U. Tomassetti, A. Rossi, S. Kallioras,
M. Mandirola, E. Cenja, A. Penna, G. Magenes.
Experimental campaign on cavity walls systems
representative of the Groningen building stock.
Report, EUC318/2015U, EUCENTRE, Pavia,
Italy.
Graziotti et al. (2016a)
F. Graziotti, U. Tomassetti, A. Rossi, B.
Marchesi, S. Kallioras, M. Mandirola, A.
Fragomeli, E. Mellia, S. Peloso, F. Cuppari, G.
Guerrini, A. Penna, G. Magenes. Experimental
campaign on a clay URM full-scale specimen
representative of the Groningen building stock.
Report EUC128/2016U, Eucentre, Pavia, IT.
Graziotti et al. (2016b)
F. Graziotti, U. Tomassetti, A. Penna, G.
Magenes. Out-of-plane shaking table tests on
URM single leaf and cavity walls. Eng Structs
125 (2016) 455–470.
Graziotti et al. (2016c)
F. Graziotti, A. Rossi, M. Mandirola, A. Penna,
G. Magenes. Experimental characterisation of
calcium-silicate brick masonry for seismic
assessment. 16th Intl Brick and Block Masonry
conference ISBN 978-1-138-02999-6.
Graziotti et al. (2017a)
F. Graziotti, U. Tomassetti, S. Kallioras, A.
Penna, G. Magenes. Shaking table test on a full
scale URM cavity wall building. Bull of Earthq
Eng, 15 (12), pp 5329-5364.
Graziotti et al. (2017b)
F. Graziotti, U. Tomassetti, L. Grottoli, S.
Dainotti, A. Penna, G. Magenes. Shaking table
tests of URM walls subjected to two-way
bending out-of-plane seismic excitation. Anidis
2017, Pistoia.

Bibliography
Graziotti et al. (2018)
F. Graziotti, U. Tomassetti, L. Grottoli, A. Penna,
G. Magenes. Full-scale Out-of-plane Shaking
Table Tests Of Urm Walls in Two-way Bending.
10amc.
Green et al. (2019)
R.A. Green, J.J. Bommer, A. Rodriguez-Marek,
B.W. Maurer, P.J. Stafford, B. Edwards, P.P.
Kruiver, G. de Lange, J. van Elk. Addressing
limitations in existing ‘simplified’ liquefaction
triggering evaluation procedures: application
to induced seismicity in the Groningen gas
field. Bull of Earthq Eng (2019) 17:4539–4557.
doi.org/10.1007/s10518-018-0489-3
Green et al. (2020)
R.A. Green, J.J. Bommer, P.J. Stafford, B.W.
Maurer, P.P. Kruiver, B. Edward, A. RodriguezMarek, G. de Lange, S.J. Oates, T. Storck, P.
Omidi, S.J. Bourne, J. van Elk. Liquefaction
Hazard in the Groningen Region of the
Netherlands due to Induced Seismicity. J
Geotech Geoenviron Eng, 2020, 146(8):
04020068.
Griffith (2000)
M.C. Griffith. Experimental Study of the
Flexural Strength of URM Brick Walls. Research
Report R169, Department of Civil and
Environmental Eng, Adelaide U.
Griffith et al. (2003)
M.C. Griffith, G. Magenes, G. Melis, L. Picchi.
Evaluation Of Out-of-plane Stability Of
Unreinforced Masonry Walls Subjected To
Seismic Excitation. J of Earthq Eng, 7:S1,
141-169. doi.org/10.1080/13632460309350476
Griffith et al. (2004)
M.C. Griffith, N.T.K. Lam, J.L. Wilson, K.
Doherty. Experimental Investigation of
Unreinforced Brick Masonry Walls in Flexure. J
Struct Eng 2004130:423-432.
Griffith et al. (2005)
M.C. Griffith, S.J. Lawrence, C.R. Willis.
Diagonal Bending of Unreinforced Clay brick
masonry. J of the british masonry society,
masonry international Vol 18, No 3.
Griffith et al. (2007)
M.C. Griffith, J. Vaculik, N.T.K. Lam, J. Wilson,
E. Lumantarna. Cyclic testing of unreinforced
masonry walls in two-way bending. Earthq
Engng Struct Dyn 2007; 36:801–821.
Griffith & Vaculik (2007)
M.C. Griffith, J. Vaculik. Out-of-Plane Flexural

Strength of Unreinforced Clay Brick Masonry
Walls. TMS J September 2007.
de Groot (2019)
A. de Groot. Structural window design for inplane seismic strengthening. MSc Thesis, TU
Delft.
Grottoli et al. (2019)
L. Grottoli, S. Kallioras, P. Korswagen, F.
Graziotti. In-plane and out-of-plane quasi-static
cyclic tests on unreinforced calcium-silicate
masonry walls under high compressive load.
Technical Report EUC067/2019U, EUCENTRE
Foundation, Pavia, Italy Available online at
wwweucentreit/nam-project.
Grünberg et al. (2005)
J. Grünberg, S. Meincke, F. Radtke.
Experimentelle und numerische
Untersuchungen des Materialverhaltens von
Mauerwerk unter Erdbebenlasten. Ernst & Sohn
Verlag für Architektur und technische
Wissenschaften GmbH & Co KG, Berlin ·
Mauerwerk 9, Heft 6.
Grünthal et al. (1998)
G. Grünthal, R.M.W. Musson, J. Schwarz, M.
Stucchi. European Macroseismic Scale 1998
(EMS-98). European Seismological
Commission, sub commission on Eng
Seismology, Working Group Macroseismic
Scales Conseil de l’Europe, Cahiers du Centre
Européen de Géodynamique et de
Séismologie, Vol 15, Luxembourg.
Guerrini et al. (2017a)
G. Guerrini, F. Graziotti, A. Penna, G. Magenes.
Dynamic shake-table tests on two full-scale,
unreinforced masonry buildings subjected to
induced seismicity. Experimental vibration
analysis of civil engineering structures, San
Diego, USA.
Guerrini et al. (2017b)
G. Guerrini, F. Graziotti, A. Penna, G. Magenes.
Improved evaluation of inelastic displacement
demands for short- period masonry structures.
Earthq Engng Struct Dyn 2017; 46:1411–1430.
Gupta & Baker (2019)
A. Gupta, J.W. Baker. A framework for timevarying induced seismicity risk assessment, with
application in Oklahoma. Bull of Earthq Eng
(2019) 17:4475–4493. doi.org/10.1007/
s10518-019-00620-5
Gálvez et al. (2017)
F. Gálvez, K. Ip, J. Vaculik, M.C. Griffith, L.

293
Sorrentino, D. Dizhur, J.M. Ingham. Discrete
Element Modelling To Predict Failure Strength
Of Unreinforced Masonry Walls. Australian
Earthq Eng Soc 2017 Conf, Nov 24-26,
Canberra, ACT.
De Haan (2016)
F.S. De Haan. Dynamic loading of existing quay
structures by induced earthquakes - A casestudy regarding the quay structures of
Groningen Seaports. Delft U of Tech.
Hak et al. (2017)
S. Hak, P. Morandi, G. Magenes. Verification Of
Drift Demands in the Design Of Rc Buildings
With Masonry Infills. 16th World Conf on
Earthq Eng, 16WCEE 2017 Santiago Chile,
January 9th to 13th 2017.
Hamed & Rabinovitch (2010)
E. Hamed, O. Rabinovitch. Lateral Out-of-Plane
Strengthening of Masonry Walls with
Composite Materials. J Compos Constr
201014:376-387.
Hancock (2006)
J. Hancock. The Influence of Duration and the
Selection and Scaling of Accelerograms in
Engineering Design and Assessment.
Department of Civil and Environmental Eng
Imperial College U of London March 2006.
Hancock & Bommer (2004)
J. Hancock, J.J. Bommer. Predicting the
number of cycles of ground motion. 13th World
Conf on Earthq Eng Vancouver, BC, Canada
August 1-6, 2004 Paper No 1989.
Hatzigeorgiou (2010)
G.D. Hatzigeorgiou. Damping modification
factors for SDOF systems subjected to nearfault, far-fault and artificial earthquakes. Earthq
Engng Struct Dyn 2010; 39:1239–1258.
Heath et al. (2008)
D.J. Heath, E.F. Gad, J.L. Wilson. Damage
Thresholds in Unreinforced Masonry. Australian
J of Struct Eng, 8:2, 145-158.
10.1080/13287982.2008.11464994
van Hees et al. (2004)
R.P.J. van Hees, L. Binda, I. Papayianni, E.
Toumbakari. Characterisation and damage
analysis of old mortars. Mats and Structs, Vol
37, pp648-664.
Al Heib et al. (2013)
M. Al Heib, H.L. Nghiem, Fabriece, Emeriault.
Understanding Sinkhole Consequences on
Masonry Structures Using Large Small-Scale

Bibliography

References

294
Physical Modeling. Intl Conf on Case Histories
in Geotechnical Eng 12.
Hendriks et al. (1995)
M.A.N. Hendriks, J.G. Rots, P.C. Van
Staalduinen. Onderzoek naar te verwachten
zettingschade bij aanleg van de noord/zuidlijn
in Amsterdam. 95 Con-r0343, Tno. doi
Hendriks & Rots (2013)
M.A.N. Hendriks, J.G. Rots. Sequentially linear
versus nonlinear analysis of RC structures. Eng
Computations: Intl J for Computer-Aided Eng
and Software, Vol 30 No 6, 2013.
Hendry (2001)
E.A.W. Hendry. Masonry walls: materials and
construction. Construction and Bldg Mats 15
(2001) 323-330.
Hildebrand et al. (2008)
R. Hildebrand, E. Keskinen, J.A. Romero
Navarrete. Vehicle vibrating on a soft
compacting soil half-space: Ground vibrations,
terrain damage, and vehicle vibrations. J of
Terramechanics 45 (2008) 121–136.
Hillerborg (1985)
A. Hillerborg. The theoretical basis of a method
to determine the fracture energy of concrete..
Rilem Technical Committees, Vol 18- N ~ 106 Materiaux et Constrcs.
Hojdys & Krajewski (2014)
Ł. Hojdys, P. Krajewski. Laboratory Tests on
Masonry Vaults with Backfill Strengthened at
the Extrados. Key Eng Mats ISSN: 1662-9795,
Vol 624, pp 510-517. doi.org/10.4028/
www.scientific.net/KEM.624.510
Ingham & Dizhur (2015)
J. Ingham, D. Dizhur. Seismic Improvement of
Load-bearing Unreinforced Masonry Cavity
Walls. U of Auckland funded by the Bldg
Research Levy.
Ingham & Griffith (2011)
J.M. Ingham, M.C. Griffith. The Performance of
Earthquake Strengthened URM Buildings in the
Christchurch CBD in the 22 February 2011
Earthquake. Technical Report. doi.org/
10.13140/RG.2.1.1548.6166
Invernizzi et al. (2011)
S. Invernizzi, D. Trovato, M.A.N. Hendriks, A.V.
Van De Graaf. Sequentially linear modelling of
local snap-back in extremely brittle structures.
Eng Structs 33 (2011) 1617–1625.
Jafari et al. (2017a)
S. Jafari, R. Esposito, J.G. Rots, F. Messali.

Bibliography
Characterizing the Material Properties of Dutch
Unreinforced Masonry. Procedia engineering,
193, 250-257.
Jafari et al. (2017b)
S. Jafari, R. Esposito, J.G. Rots. Literature
Review On The Assessment Of Masonry
Properties By Tests On Core Samples. 4th WTA
Intl PhD Symp – Delft 2017.
Jafari et al. (2018a)
S. Jafari, R. Esposito, J.G. Rots. A Comparative
Study On The Different Testing Methods:
Evaluating The Compression Properties Of
Masonry. 10th Intl Masonry Conf, Milan.
Jafari et al. (2018b)
S. Jafari, R. Esposito, J.G. Rots. From Brick to
Element: Investigating the Mechanical
Properties of Calcium Silicate Masonry. SAHC.
Jafari & Esposito (2016)
S. Jafari, R. Esposito. Material Tests for the
Characterisation of Replicated Solid Clay Brick
Masonry. Delft U of Tech Report number
C31B67WP1-12, version 01, 16 August 2017.
Jafari & Esposito (2019)
S. Jafari, R. Esposito. Summary of material
properties of existing Dutch masonry - updated
URM abacus (version 2). Delft U of Tech Report
number C31B67WP1-16, version 02.
Jafari & Rots (2015)
S. Jafari, J.G. Rots. Conclusive summary report
– Masonry material testing 2014. TU Delft.
Jalayer et al. (2009)
F. Jalayer, L. Elefante, I. Iervolino, G. Manfredi.
Confidence Factors and Structural Reliability.
Department of Struct Eng, U of Naples.
Jeary et al. (2015)
A.P. Jeary, T. Winant, J. Bunyan. Some Aspects
Of The Measurement Of Vibration Intensity For
The Assessment Of Building Structures.
Forensic Eng 7th Congress Performance of the
Built Environment November 15 – 18, 2015.
Jonaitis et al. (2009)
B. Jonaitis, G. Marciukaitis, J. Valivonis.
Analysis of the shear and flexural behaviour of
masonry with hollow calcium silicate blocks.
Eng Structs 31 (2009) 827–833.
Jongejan et al. (2019)
R. Jongejan, V. Drosos, A. Giannakou, J.
Chacko, P. Tasiopoulou, N. Zuideveld-Venema,
S. de Wit, H. Huissoon. Probabilistic
assessments of flood defence performance
subject to induced seismicity. Bull of Earthq

295

Eng (2019) 17:4517–4537. doi.org/10.1007/
of the Seismic Behavior of Load-Bearing
s10518-018-0521-7
Masonry Walls Loaded Out-of-Plane. Turkish J
Jonkman et al. (2003)
Eng Env Sci 30 (2006) , 101 – 113.
S.N. Jonkman, P.H.A.J.M. Van Gelder, J.K.
Kashyap (2014)
Vrijling. An overview of quantitative risk
J. Kashyap. Out-of-plane Strengthening Of
measures for loss of life and economic damage. Unreinforced Masonry Walls Using Frp. School
J of Hazardous Mats A99 (2003) 1–30.
Of Civil, Environmental and Mining Eng, U Of
Jonkman (2007)
Adelaide.
S.N. Jonkman. Loss of life estimation in flood
Kaushik et al. (2007)
risk assessment Theory and applications. Delft
H.B. Kaushik, D.C. Rai, S.K. Jain. Stress-Strain
U of Tech.
Characteristics of Clay Brick Masonry under
Jonkman & Penning-Rowsell (2008)
Uniaxial Compression. J Mater Civ Eng
S.N. Jonkman, E. Penning-Rowsell. Human
200719:728-739.
Instability in Flood Flows. J of the American
Kelman (2002)
Water Resources Association (JAWRA)
I. Kelman. Physical Flood Vulnerability of
44(4):1-11 DOI:
Residential Properties in Coastal, Eastern
101111⁄j1752-1688200800217x.
England. U of Cambridge, UK.
Jurevicius et al. (2015)
Kelman & Spence (2004)
D. Jurevicius, M. Stead, G. Barry. A Case Study
I. Kelman, R. Spence. An overview of flood
Of Damage Effects To Residential Buildings
actions on buildings. Eng Geology 73 (2004)
Caused By Vibratory Compaction Equipment.
297–309.
Acoustics Hunter Valley.
Khalaf (2005)
Jurina et al. (2019)
F.M. Khalaf. New Test for Determination of
L. Jurina, G. Mantegazza, E.O. Radaelli. FRCM - Masonry Tensile Bond Strength. JOURNAL OF
Strenghtening of masonry vaults: the “Duomo
MATERIALS IN CIVIL ENGINEERING © ASCE /
di Colorno” and “Braidense Library” cases in
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2005.
Italy. Key Eng Mats Vol 624.
Kim & J.Y. Kim (2014)
Kallioras et al. (2018a)
D.H. Kim, J.Y. Kim. Assessment on Natural
S. Kallioras, G. Guerrini, U. Tomassetti, B.
Frequencies of Structures using Field
Marchesi, A. Penna, F. Graziotti, G. Magenes.
Measurement and FE Analysis. Intl J of HighExperimental seismic performance of a fullRise Bldgs December 2014, Vol 3, No 4,
scale unreinforced clay-masonry building with
305-310.
flexible timber diaphragms. Eng Structs 161
Kim & Lee (1999)
(2018) 231–249.
D.H. Kim, J.S. Lee. Propagation and
Kallioras et al. (2018b)
attenuation characteristics of various ground
S. Kallioras, F. Graziotti, A. Penna. Numerical
vibrations. Soil Dyns and Earthq Eng.
assessment of the dynamic response of a URM Kita et al. (2020)
terraced house exposed to induced seismicity.
A. Kita, N. Cavalagli, M.G. Masciotta, P.B.
Bull Earthq Eng 2018. doi.org/10.1007/
Lourenço, F. Ubertini. Rapid post-earthquake
s10518-018-0495-5
damage localization and quantification in
Kanit et al. (2010)
masonry structures through multidimensional
R. Kanit, M. Erdal, Ö. Can. Assessing the
non-linear seismic IDA. Eng Structs 219 (2020)
experimental behaviour of load bearing
11084.
masonry walls subjected to out-of-plane
Kooi et al. (2021)
loading. Scientific Research and Essays Vol
H. Kooi, J.C. Landwehr, R.J. Stuurman, J.J. van
5(21), pp 3336-3344, 4 November, 2010
Meerten, O. Levelt, M. Korff. Indirecte schadeAvailable online at http://
effecten van diepe bodemdaling en -stijging bij
wwwacademicjournalsorg/SRE ISSN 1992-2248 het Groningen gasveld en gasopslag Norg.
©2010 Academic Js.
Deltares, 11207096-002-BGS-0001, 30
Kanit & Atimtay (2006)
augustus 2021.
R. Kanit, E. Atimtay. Experimental Assessment

Bibliography

References

296
Korff (2009)
M. Korff. Deformations and damage to
buildings adjacent to deep excavations in soft
soils. COB, Delft Cluster - Deltares.
Korff et al. (2013)
M. Korff, H.M.G. Kruse, T.P. Stoutjesdijk, J.
Breedeveld, G.A. van den Ham, P. Holscher, G.
de Lange, P. Meijers, E. Vastenburg, T.
Vermaas, M.A.T. Visschedijk. Effecten
geïnduceerde aardbevingen op kritische
infrastructuur Groningen. Deltares.
Kowalewski & Gajewski (2015)
Ł. Kowalewski, M. Gajewski. Determination of
failure modes in brick walls using cohesive
elements approach. Procedia Eng 111 ( 2015 )
454 – 461.
Kralj et al. (1990)
B. Kralj, G.N. Pande, J. Middleton. On the
mechanics of frost damage to masonry.
Computers and Structs, Vol 41, no 1, pp 53-66,
1991.
Kruiver et al. (2017a)
P.P. Kruiver, E. van Dedem, R. Romijn, G. de
Lange, M. Korff, J. Stafleu, J.L. Gunnink, A.
Rodriguez-Marek, J.J. Bommer, J. van Elk, D.
Doornhof. An integrated shear-wave velocity
model for the Groningen gas field, The
Netherlands. Bull Earthq Eng (2017) 15:3555–
3580 - DOI. doi.org/10.1007/s10518-017-0105y
Kruiver et al. (2017b)
P.P. Kruiver, A. Wiersma, F.H. Kloosterman, G.
de Lange, M. Korff, J. Stafleu, F.S. Busschers, R.
Harting, J.L. Gunnink, R.A. Green, J. van Elk, D.
Doornhof. Characterisation of the Groningen
subsurface for seismic hazard and risk
modelling. Netherlands J of Geosciences —
Geologie en Mijnbouw |96 – 5 | s215–s233 |
2017.
Kumar et al. (2019)
S.L. Kumar, H.B. Aravind, N. Hossiney. Digital
image correlation (DIC) for measuring strain in
brick masonry specimen using Ncorr open
source 2D MATLAB program. Results in Eng 4
(2019) 100061.
Lagomarsino et al. (2013)
S. Lagomarsino, A. Penna, A. Galasco, S.
Cattari. TREMURI program: An equivalent
frame model for the nonlinear seismic analysis
of masonry buildings. Eng Structs 56 (2013)
1787–1799.

Bibliography
Lam et al. (2002)
N.T.K. Lam, M. Griffith, J. Wilson, K. Doherty.
Time–history analysis of URM walls in out-ofplane flexure. Eng Structs 25 (2003) 743–754.
Langroudi et al. (2011)
J.R. Langroudi, M.M. Ranjbar, S.J. Hashemi,
A.S. Moghadam. Evaluation of Roof Diaphragm
Effect on Seismic Behavior of Masonry
Buildings. Procdngs of the 8th Intl Conf on
Struct Dyns, EURODYN 2011 453 Leuven,
Belgium, 4-6 July 2011.
Larby (2004)
J.A. Larby. Microscopy applied to the diagnosis
of the deterioration of brick masonry.
Construction and Bldg Mats 18 (2004) 299–
307.
Laurin et al. (2012)
F. Laurin, J.S. Charrier, D. Lévêque, J.F. Maire,
A. Mavel, P. Nuñez. Determination of the
properties of composite materials thanks to
digital image correlation measurements.
Procedia IUTAM 4 (2012) 106 – 115.
Lava (2015)
P. Lava. Practical considerations in DIC
measurements. 10th international conference
on Advcs in Experimental Mechs.
Lawrence & Marshall (2000)
S. Lawrence, R. Marshall. Virtual Work Design
Method For Masonry Panels Under Lateral
Load. 12Th Intl Brick/Block Masonry Conf.
Lee & Lopez (2014)
J. Lee, M.M. Lopez. An Experimental Study on
Fracture Energy of Plain Concrete. Intl J of
Conc Structs and Mats Vol8, No2, pp129–139,
June 2014 DOI. doi.org/10.1007/
s40069-014-0068-1 ISSN 1976-0485 / eISSN
2234-1315
Leiva (1991)
G.H. Leiva. Seismic Resistance of Two-Storey
Masonry Walls. U of Texas at Austin.
Lendering et al. (2015)
K.T. Lendering, S.N. Jonkman, M. Kok. Flood
risk of regional flood defences. Delft U of Tech.
Li et al. (2024)
X. Li, F. Messali, R. Esposito. Mechanical
Characterisation of Multi-Wythe Masonry
Bridge in the City of Amsterdam. SAHC 2023,
RILEM Bookseries 47, pp 527–540.
10.1007/978-3-031-39603-8_43
Licciardello et al. (2020)
L. Licciardello, J.G. Rots, R. Esposito.

Performance Of Unreinforced Masonry
Strengthened With Bed Joint Reinforced
Repointing. 12th Intl Conf on Struct Analysis of
Historical Constrcs, SAHC. doi
Likas et al. (2003)
A. Likas, N. Vlassis, J.J. Verbeek. The global kmeans clustering algorithm. Pattern
Recognition 36 (2003) 451 – 461. doi.org/
10.1016/S0031-3203(02)00060-2
Liu & Xu (2022)
X. Liu, L. Xu. Soil-Building Interaction under
Surface Horizontal Strain Induced by
Underground Mining. Advcs in Civil Eng
Volume 2022, Article ID 2425936. doi.org/
10.1155/2022/2425936
Lourenço et al. (1995)
P.B. Lourenço, J.G. Rots, J. Blaauwendraad.
Two approaches for the analysis of masonry
structures: micro and macro-modeling. HERON
Vol 40 No4 ISSN 0046-7316.
Lourenço (1996)
P.B. Lourenço. Computational strategies for
masonry structures. PhD Dissertation, TU Delft.
Lourenço & Rots (1997)
P.B. Lourenço, J.G. Rots. Multisurface interface
model for analysis of masonry structures. J of
Eng Mechs, 123 (7), pp 660-668.
Lubelli et al. (2004)
B. Lubelli, R.P.J. van Hees, C.J.W.P. Groot. The
role of sea salts in the occurrence of different
damage mechanisms and decay patterns on
brick masonry. Construction and Bldg Mats 18
(2004) 119–124. 10.1016/
j.conbuildmat.2003.08.017
Magenes et al. (1995)
G. Magenes, G.M. Calvi, G.R. Kingsley. Seismic
Testing of a Full-Scale, Two-Story Masonry
Building: Test Procedure and Measured
Experimental Response. Experimental and
Numerical Investigation on a brick Masonry
Bldg Prototype - Numerical Prediction of the
Experiment, Report 30 - GNDT, U of Pavia,
Department of Struct Mechs.
Magenes (2006)
G. Magenes. Masonry Building Design in
Seismic Areas: Recent Experiences and
Prospects From a European Standpoint. First
European Conf on Earthq Eng and Seismology.
Magenes et al. (2008)
G. Magenes, P. Morandi, A. Penna.
Experimental In-plane Cyclic Response Of

297
Masonry Walls With Clay Units. The 14th World
Conf on Earthq Eng October 12-17, 2008,
Beijing, China.
Magenes (2010)
G. Magenes. Earthquake resistant design of
masonry structures: rules, backgrounds, latest
findings. 8th Intl Masonry Conf 2010 in
Dresden.
Magenes et al. (2010)
G. Magenes, A. Penna, A. Galasco, M.D. Paré.
In-plane cyclic shear tests of undressed doubleleaf stone masonry panels. 8th Intl Masonry
Conf 2010 in Dresden.
Magenes et al. (2012)
G. Magenes, P. Morandi, A. Penna. In-plane
Cyclic Tests Of Calcium Silicate Masonry Walls.
14th Intl Brick and Block Masonry Conf, Sydney,
Australia.
Magenes & Calvi (1992)
G. Magenes, G.M. Calvi. Cyclic behaviour of
brick masonry walls. Earthq Eng, Tenth World
conference.
Magenes & Calvi (1997)
G. Magenes, G.M. Calvi. In-plane Seismic
Response Of Brick Masonry Walls. Earthq Eng
and Struct Dyns, Vol 26, 1091ð1112 (1997).
Maheri & Najafgholipour (2012)
M.R. Maheri, M.A. Najafgholipour. In-plane
Shear and Out-of-plane Bending Capacity
Interaction in Brick Masonry Walls. 15 Wcee.
Mair (2003)
R.J. Mair. Research on tunnelling-induced
ground movements and their effects on
buildings – Lessons from the Jubilee Line
extension. In: Bldg response to tunnelling:
Case studies from construction of the Jubilee
Line extension, Eds Burland JB, Standing JR
and Jardine FM CIRIA SP199 and Thomas
Telford, London.
Malomo et al. (2018)
D. Malomo, M.J. DeJong, A. Penna. Distinct
Element Modelling Of The In-Plane Failure
Mechanisms Of Urm Walls. 10th IMC, Milan
2018.
Mariani et al. (2017)
V. Mariani, F. Messali, M.A.N. Hendriks, J.G.
Rots. Numerical Modelling And Seismic
Analysis Of Dutch Masonry Structural
Components And Buildings. 16th World Conf
on Earthq, 16WCEE 2017.

Bibliography

References

298
Masia et al. (2004)
M.J. Masia, Y. Han, S.J. Lawrence, A.W. Page.
An Experimental Study Of Brick Masonry
Specimens Subjected To Biaxial Bending. 13th
Intl Brick and Block Masonry Conf Amsterdam,
July 4-7, 2004.
Masia et al. (2007)
M.J. Masia, Y. Han, C.J. Player, M.R.S. Correa,
A.W. Page. Torsion Shear Test for Mortar Joints
in Masonry: Preliminary Experimental Results.
10th NAMC, Missouri.
Masia et al. (2009)
M.J. Masia, R.B. Petersen, Y. Han, M.R.S.
Correa. Torsion Shear Test For Mortar Joints in
Masonry: Specimen Preparation and
Experimental Results. 11th Canadian Masonry
Symp, Toronto, Ontario, May 31- June 3, 2009.
Mason et al. (2019)
M.S. Mason, E. Phillips, T. Okada, J. O’Brien.
Analysis of damage to buildings following the
2010–11 Eastern Australia floods. National
Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility,
Gold Coast.
Massarsch (2002)
K.R. Massarsch. Effects of Vibratory
Compaction. Geo Eng AB, Stockholm, Sweden.
Matteis et al. (2014)
G.D. Matteis, E. Criber, G. Brando. Seismic
Vulnerability Assessment Of Masonry Churches
Through the Application Of Probabilistic
Methods. SAHC2014 – 9th Intl Conf on Struct
Analysis of Historical Constrcs.
Mazzorana et al. (2014)
B. Mazzorana, S. Simoni, C. Scherer, B. Gems,
S. Fuchs, M. Keiler. A physical approach on
flood risk vulnerability of buildings. Hydrol
Earth Syst Sci, 18, 3817–3836, 2014
wwwhydrol-earth-syst-scinet/18/3817/2014/.
doi.org/10.5194/hess-18-3817-2014
Meillyta (2012)
Meillyta. Finite Element Modelling of
Unreinforced Masonry (URM) Wall with
Openings: Studies in Australia. The Procdngs
of 2nd Annual Intl Conf Syiah Kuala U 2012 &
8th IMT-GT Uninet Biosciences Conf Banda
Aceh, 22-24 November 2012.
Melis (2002)
G. Melis. Displacement-based Seismic Analysis
For Out Of Plane Bending Of Unreinforced
Masonry Walls. European School Of Advanced

Bibliography
Studies in Reduction Of Seismic Risk Rose
School.
Mendes & Lourenço (2010)
N. Mendes, P.B. Lourenço. Seismic Assessment
of Masonry “Gaioleiro” Buildings in Lisbon,
Portugal. J of Earthq Eng, 14:80–101, 2010.
Mergos & Beyer (2014)
P. Mergos, K. Beyer. Loading protocols for
European regions of low to moderate
seismicity. Bull Earthq Eng (2014) 12:2507–
2530 - DOI. doi.org/10.1007/
s10518-014-9603-3
Mergos & Beyer (2015)
P. Mergos, K. Beyer. Loading Protocols For
Structures Designed For Different Behaviour
Factors. SECED 2015 Conf: Earthq Risk and
Eng towards a Resilient World 9-10 July 2015,
Cambridge UK.
Messali et al. (2017)
F. Messali, G.J.P. Ravenshorst, R. Esposito, J.G.
Rots. Large-scale testing program for the
seismic characterization of Dutch masonry
walls. 16th World Conf on Earthq, WCEE 2017,
9-13 Jan 2017, Santiago, Chile.
Messali et al. (2018)
F. Messali, M. Pari, R. Esposito, J. Rots, D. Den
Hertog. Blind Predictions Of A Cyclic Pushover
Test On A Two- Storey Masonry Assemblage: A
Comparative Study. 16th European Conf on
Earthq Eng, Thessaloniki 2018.
Messali & Rots (2018)
F. Messali, J.G. Rots. In-plane drift capacity at
near collapse of rocking unreinforced calcium
silicate and clay masonry piers. Eng Structs 164
(2018) 183–194.
Meyer & Caballero-Gonzaléz (2019)
U. Meyer, A. Caballero-Gonzaléz. Esecmase –
Shaking Table Tests At the National Technical
University in Athens. U of Athens.
Michel et al. (2010)
C. Michel, B. Zapico, P. Lestuzzi, F.J. Molina, F.
Weber. Quantification of fundamental
frequency drop for unreinforced masonry
buildings from dynamic tests. Earthq Eng Struct
Dyn 2011; 40:1283–1296.
Mignan et al. (2015)
A. Mignan, D. Landtwing, P. Kästli, B. Mena, S.
Wiemer. Induced seismicity risk analysis of the
2006 Basel, Switzerland, Enhanced Geothermal
System project: Influence of uncertainties on

risk mitigation. Geothermics 53 (2015) 133–
146.
Milosevic et al. (2018)
J. Milosevic, R. Bento, S. Cattari. Development
Of Seismic Fragility Curves For Mixed MasonryRc Buildings In Lisbon. 10th IMC, Milan 2018.
Miraglia et al. (2015)
S. Miraglia, W. Courage, P. Meijers. Fragility
Functions for Pipeline in Liquefiable Sand: a
Case Study on the Groningen Gas-Network.
12th Intl Conf on Applications of Statistics and
Probability in Civil Eng, ICASP12 Vancouver,
Canada, July 12-15, 2015.
Modena et al. (2013)
C. Modena, F.d. Porto, M.R. Valluzzi, M.
Munari. Criteria and Technologies For the
Structural Repair and Strengthening Of
Architectural Heritage. Intl Conf, Chennai,
India, 13th – 16th February 2013.
Mohammed et al. (2009)
B.S. Mohammed, B.H.A. Bakar, K.K. Choong.
The Effects of Opening on the Structural
Behavior of Masonry Wall Subjected to
Compressive Loading - Strain Variation. The
Open Civil Eng J, 2009, 3, 62-73.
Mojsilovic et al. (2019)
N. Mojsilovic, G. Simundic, A. Page. StaticCyclic Shear Tests on Masonry Wallettes with a
Damp-Proof Course Membrane. J or hosting
entity.
Mojsilović & Salmanpour (2016)
N. Mojsilović, A.H. Salmanpour. Masonry walls
subjected to in-plane cyclic loading:
Application of Digital Image Correlation for
deformation field measurement. Institute of
Struct Eng, Department of Civil, Environmental
and Geomatic Eng, ETH Zurich, 8093,
Switzerland.
Moon (2004)
F.L. Moon. Seismic Strengthening Of Low-rise
Unreinforced Masonry Structures With Flexible
Diaphragms. Georgia Institute of Tech May.
Moon et al. (2006)
F.L. Moon, Y. Tianyi, R.T. Leon, L.F. Kahn.
Recommendations for Seismic Evaluation and
Retrofit of Low-Rise URM Structures. J Struct
Eng, 2006, 132(5): 663-672.
Morandi et al. (2018)
P. Morandi, L. Albanesi, F. Graziotti, T. Li Piani,
A. Penna, G. Magenes. Development of a
dataset on the in-plane experimental response

299
of URM piers with bricks and blocks.
Construction and Bldg Mats 190 (2018) 593–
611.
Moreira et al. (2012)
S. Moreira, D.V. Oliveira, L.F. Ramos, P.B.
Lourenço, R.P. Fernandes, J. Guerreiro.
Experimental study on the seismic behavior of
masonry wall-to-floor connections. 15 Wcee.
Mors & Jonkers (2013)
R.M. Mors, H.M. Jonkers. Reduction of water
permeation through cracks in mortar by
addition of bacteria based healing agent.
Faculty of Civil Eng and Geosciences, Mats &
Environment section, Delft U of Tech.
Mosalam et al. (2009)
K. Mosalam, L. Glascoe, J. Bernier. Mechanical
Properties of Unreinforced Brick Masonry,
Section 1. Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory LLNL-TR-417646.
Mosallam (2007)
A.S. Mosallam. Out-of-plane flexural behavior
of unreinforced red brick walls strengthened
with FRP composites. Composites: Part B 38
(2007) 559–574.
Muir et al. (2017)
C.A. Muir, P.L. Beazley, R.D. Jury, W.Y. Kam, P.D.
Den Hertog. Terraced House – Practical
application of NZSEE principles in the
Netherlands. NZSEE Conf.
Mulder et al. (2018)
M. Mulder, P. Perey, B. Scholtens, G. de Kam,
G. Perlaviciute. Gas production and
earthquakes in Groningen - reflection on
economic and social consequences. Centre for
Energy Economics Research - CEER - Policy
Papers | no 3 | June 2018.
Mylonakis et al. (2006)
G. Mylonakis, S. Nikolaou, G. Gazetas.
Footings under seismic loading: Analysis and
design issues with emphasis on bridge
foundations. Soil Dyns and Earthq Eng 26
(2006) 824–853.
NAM et al. (2015)
NAM, M. Pickering, J. van Elk, D. Doornhof. An
estimate of the earthquake hypocenter
locations in the Groningen Gas Field. NAM.
NAM (2017)
NAM. Trillingsschade aan gebouwen. NAM
170822-HA.
NEN (2015)
NEN. NPR 9998. NEN.

Bibliography

References

300
NZSEE et al. (2006)
NZSEE, SESOC, NZGS, MBIE, EQC.
Assessment and Improvement of the Structural
Performance of Buildings in Earthquakes Section 10 Revision Seismic Assessment of
Unreinforced Masonry Buildings. New Zealand
Soc For Earthq Eng, ISBN 978-0-473-32278-6,
Update 2015.
Nam (2018)
Nam. Field Test and Analysis of Everyday Traininduced Ground Motions. Nam.
Narassiguin et al. (2016)
A. Narassiguin, M. Bibimoune, H. Elghazel, A.
Aussem. An extensive empirical comparison of
ensemble learning methods for binary
classification. Pattern Anal Applic (2016)
19:1093–1128. 10.1007/s10044-016-0553-z
Nateghi & Alemi (2008)
F. Nateghi, F. Alemi. Experimental study of
seismic behaviour of typical Iranian URM brick
walls. 14th world conference on earthquake
engineering, October 12-17, 2008, Beijing,
China.
Negulescu et al. (2014)
C. Negulescu, T. Ulrich, A. Baills, D.M. Seyedi.
Fragility curves for masonry structures
submitted to permanent ground displacements
and earthquakes. Nat Hzrds (2014) 74:1461–
1474 -DOI. doi.org/10.1007/s11069-014-1253x
Nehrp (2012)
Nehrp. Soil-Structure Interaction for Building
Structures. NIST GCR 12-917-21 US
Department of Commerce National Institute of
Standards and Tech.
Nen (2005)
Nen. NEN 6790 - Technische grondslagen voor
bouwconstructies - TGB 1990 Steenconstructies - Basiseisen en
bepalingsmethoden. NEN - Nederlands
Normalisatie-instituut.
Nen (2018)
Nen. Nederlandse Praktijkrichtlijn (NPR) 9998 Dutch guideline of practice. Nen.
Nepveu et al. (2016)
M. Nepveu, K. van Thienen-Visser, D. Sijacic.
Statistics of seismic events at the Groningen
field. Bull Earthq Eng (2016) 14:3343–3362
DOI. doi.org/10.1007/s10518-016-0007-4
Nguyen & Lallemant (2022)
M. Nguyen, D. Lallemant. Order Matters: The

Bibliography
Benefits of Ordinal Fragility Curves for Damage
and Loss Estimation. Risk Analysis, Vol 42, No
5, 2022. doi.org/10.1111/risa.13815
Noorlandt et al. (2018)
R. Noorlandt, P.P. Kruiver, M.P.E. de Kleine, M.
Karaoulis, G. de Lange, A. di Matteo, J. von
Ketlehodt, E. Ruigrok, B. Edwards, A.
Rodriguez-Marek, J.J. Bommer, J. van Elk, D.
Doornhof. Characterisation of ground motion
recording stations in the Groningen gas field. J
Seismol (2018) 22:605–623. doi.org/10.1007/
s10950-017-9725-6
Noortman (2019)
F.J. Noortman. Applicability Of the Pushover
Method For the Seismic Assessment Of Urm
Structures in Groningen. Delft U of Tech.
Ntinalexis et al. (2022)
M. Ntinalexis, P.P. Kruiver, J.J. Bommer, E.
Ruigrok, A. Rodriguez-Marek, B. Edwards, R.
Pinho, J. Spetzler, E.O. Hernandez, M. Pefkos,
M. Bahrampouri, E.P. van Onselen, B. Dost, J.
van Elk. A database of ground motion
recordings, site profiles, and amplification
factors from the Groningen gas field in the
Netherlands. Earthq Spectra 2023, Vol 39(1)
687–701. 10.1177/87552930221140926
Okada & Takai (2000)
S. Okada, N. Takai. Classifications of Structural
Types and Damage Patterns of Buildings for
Earthquake field Investigation. Struct and
Construction Eng (Transactions of AIJ). doi.org/
10.3130/aijs.64.65_5
Oktiovan et al. (2023)
Y.P. Oktiovan, F. Messali, J.G. Rots. Detailed
distinct element modeling of a Utrecht wharf
cellar for the assessment of the load-bearing
capacity and failure mechanism. Procdngs of
the Seventeenth Intl Conf on Civil, Struct and
Environmental Eng Computing (Vol 6) CivilComp Press. doi.org/10.4203/ccc.6.6.2
Oliveira et al. (2003)
J.T. Oliveira, J.O. Barros, P.B. Lourenço, E.
Bonaldo. Flexural behavior of reinforced
masonry panels. GROW-1999-70420 “ISOBRICK” from the European Commission.
Olivito & Stumpo (2001)
R.S. Olivito, P. Stumpo. Fracture mechanics in
the characterisation of brick masonry structures.
Mats and Structs/Matériaux et Constrcs, Vol 34,
May 2001, pp 217-223.

Oses et al. (2014)
N. Oses, F. Dornaika, A. Moujahid. ImageBased Delineation and Classification of Built
Heritage Masonry. Remote Sens 2014, 6,
1863-1889. 10.3390/rs6031863
Osterberg (1935)
G. Osterberg. Topography of the layer of rods
and cones in the human retina. Acta
Ophthalmol [Suppl] 13:6,1–102.
Page (1995)
A.W. Page. Unreinforced Masonry Structures an australian overview. Pacific conference on
earthquake engineering (PCEE 95), Melbourne.
Palmisano et al. (2016)
F. Palmisano, C. Vitone, F. Cotecchia.
Methodology for Landslide Damage
Assessment. ScienceDirect.
Palomo-Velez et al. (2023)
G. Palomo-Velez, N. Contzen, G. Perlaviciute,
L. Steg. Trust in institutions and public
acceptability of risky energy production:
Testing the causal relationships in the context
of Groningen earthquakes. Energy Research &
Social Science 96 (2023) 102927. doi.org/
10.1016/j.erss.2022.102927
Paparo & Beyer (2014)
A. Paparo, K. Beyer. Quasi-static cyclic tests of
two mixed reinforced concrete–unreinforced
masonry wall structures. Eng Structs 71 (2014)
201–211.
Pari et al. (2017)
M. Pari, M.A.N. Hendriks, J.G. Rots.
Sequentially Linear Analysis On Masonry Walls
– New Crack Closure Algorithm. 13Th
Canadian Masonry Symp Halifax, Canada June
4Th – June 7Th 2017.
Pari et al. (2018)
M. Pari, J.G. Rots, M.A.N. Hendriks. Nonproportional loading for 3-D stress situations in
Sequentially Linear Analysis. EuroC 2018.
Pavía & Hanley (2010)
S. Pavía, R. Hanley. Flexural bond strength of
natural hydraulic lime mortar and clay brick.
Mats and Structs (2010) 43:913–922 DOI.
doi.org/10.1617/s11527-009-9555-2
Pelà et al. (2014)
L. Pelà, M. Cervera, S. Oller, M. Chiumenti. A
localized mapped damage model for
orthotropic materials. Eng Fracture Mechs 124–
125 (2014) 196–216.

301
Pereira et al. (2008)
E.B. Pereira, G. Fischer, J.A.O. Barros. Imagebased detection and analysis of crack
propagation in cementitious composites. U of
Minho, Guimaraes, Portugal.
Petry & Beyer (2015a)
S. Petry, K. Beyer. Limit states of modern
unreinforced clay brick masonry walls subjected
to in-plane loading. Bull Earthq Eng (2015)
13:1073–1095 DOI. doi.org/10.1007/
s10518-014-9695-9
Petry & Beyer (2015b)
S. Petry, K. Beyer. Cyclic test data of six
unreinforced masonry walls with different
boundary conditions. Earthq Spectra
November 2015, Vol 31, No 4, pp 2459-2484.
Pina-Henriques et al. (2004)
J. Pina-Henriques, P.B. Lourenço, L. Binda, A.
Anzani. Testing and modelling of multiple-leaf
masonry walls under shear and compression. U
of Minho, Department of Civil Eng.
Pitilakis (2006)
D. Pitilakis. Soil-structure Interaction Modeling
Using Equivalent Linear Soil Behavior in the
Substructure Method. École Centrale Des Arts
Et Manufactures.
Van Der Pluijm (1997)
R. Van Der Pluijm. Non-Linear Behaviour of
Masonry under Tension. Heron, Vol 42 No 1
ISSN 0046-7316.
Van Der Pluijm (1999)
R. Van Der Pluijm. Out-of-plane Bending Of
Masonry Behaviour and Strength. TU
Eindhoven.
Van Der Pluijm (2001)
R. Van Der Pluijm. Laterally Loaded Masonry
Panels made with Thin Layer Mortar. TNOreport 2001-CON-BM-R5015.
Van Der Pluijm (2019)
R. Van Der Pluijm. Tests on Laterally Loaded
Clay Brick Panels. EINDHOVEN UNIVERSITY of
TECHNOLOGY TUE/BCO/9903.
Popal (2013)
R. Popal. A New Shear Test Method for Mortar
Bed Joints. Department Of Civil Eng Calgary,
Alberta.
Portioli et al. (2018)
F. Portioli, R. Gagliardo, L. Landolfo. Evaluation
Of Collapse Displacements In Dry-Jointed
Masonry Structures Subjected To Settlements:

Bibliography

References

302
Experimental Tests And Rigid Block Modelling.
10th IMC, Milan 2018.
Portioli & Cascini (2015)
F. Portioli, L. Cascini. Assessment of masonry
structures subjected to foundation settlements
using rigid block limit analysis. Eng Structs 113
(2016) 347–361.
Portioli & Cascini (2016)
F. Portioli, L. Cascini. Contact Dynamics of
Masonry Block Structures Using Mathematical
Programming. J of Earthq Eng, 22:94–125,
2018.
Portioli & Cascini (2017)
F. Portioli, L. Cascini. Large displacement
analysis of dry-jointed masonry structures
subjected to settlements using rigid block
modelling. Eng Structs 148 (2017) 485–496.
da Porto et al. (2010)
F. da Porto, G. Guidi, E. Garbin, C. Modena. InPlane Behavior of Clay Masonry Walls:
Experimental Testing and Finite-Element
Modeling. J Struct Eng 2010136:1379-1392.
Potts & Addenbrooke (1997)
D.M. Potts, T.I. Addenbrooke. A structure's
influence on tunnelling-induced ground
movements. Procdngs of the Institution of Civil
Engineers, Geotechnical Eng 1997, 125, April,
109-125.
Price (2013)
A.D. Price. Multi-GPU Computing with Abaqus:
Benchmarking and scaling for multiphysics
applications in mechatronics. 2013 SIMULIA
Community Conf.
Puente et al. (2018)
I. Puente, R. Lindenbergh, A. Van Natijne, R.
Esposito, R. Schipper. Monitoring Of
Progressive Damage In Buildings Using Laser
Scan Data. Isprs.
Raaijmakers (1994)
B.H.J. Raaijmakers. Modellering van
Constructies bij een Dynamische Excitatie via
de fundering. TNO.
Ramos et al. (2015)
T. Ramos, A. Furtado, S. Eslami, S. Alves, H.
Rodrigues, A. Arêde, P. Tavares, P. Moreira. 2D
and 3D Digital Image Correlation in Civil
Engineering – Measurements in a Masonry
Wall. Procedia Eng 114 (2015) 215 – 222.
Rapone et al. (2020)
D. Rapone, G. Brando, E. Spacone. A
Discontinuum Finite Element Modelling

Bibliography
Approach For Reproducing the Structural
Behaviour Of Masonry Walls. 14th World
Congress in Comput Mechs (WCCM).
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction (2022)
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction. Global Assessment Report on
Disaster Risk Reduction 2022 - Our World at
Risk: Transforming Governance for a Resilient
Future.. Geneva ISBN: 9789212320281.
Ren et al. (1987)
G. Ren, D.J. Reddish, B.N. Whittaker. Mining
Subsidence and Displacement Prediction Using
Influence Function Methods. Mining Science
and Tech, 5 (1987) 89-104. doi
Reneckis & LaFave (2010)
D. Reneckis, J.M. LaFave. Out-of-Plane Seismic
Performance and Detailing of Brick Veneer
Walls. J Struct Eng 2010136:781-794.
Reyes et al. (2008)
E. Reyes, M.J. Casati, J.C. Gálvez. Cohesive
crack model for mixed mode fracture of brick
masonry. Int J Fract (2008) 151:29–55.
Ritter (2017)
S. Ritter. Experiments in tunnel–soil–structure
interaction. Department of Eng, U of
Cambridge.
Ritter et al. (2017)
S. Ritter, G. Giardina, M.J. Dejong, R.J. Mair.
Influence of building characteristics on
tunnelling-induced ground movements.
Géotechnique 67, No 10, 926–937. doi.org/
10.1680/jgeot.SIP17.P.138
Ritter et al. (2020)
S. Ritter, G. Giardina, A. Franza, M.J. DeJong.
Building Deformation Caused by Tunneling:
Centrifuge Modeling. J of Geotechnical and
Geoenvironmental Eng.
10.1061/%28ASCE%29GT.1943-5606.0002223
Robertson & Wride (1998)
P.K. Robertson, C.E. Wride. Evaluating cyclic
liquefaction potential using the cone
penetration test. Can Geotech J 35: 442–459.
Rodriguez et al. (2013)
J. Rodriguez, F. Martinez, J. Martí. Concrete
Constitutive Model, Calibration and
Applications. 2013 SIMULIA Community Conf.
Romao et al. (2008)
X. Romao, J. Guedes, A. Costa, R. Delgado.
Adequacy Of the Ec8-part 3 Proposed
Confidence Factors For the Assessment Of

Existing Rc Structures. 14th World Conf Earthq
Eng, Beijing, China.
Romijn et al. (2017)
R. Romijn, J. van Elk, D. Doornhof. Groningen
Velocity Model 2017 - Groningen full elastic
velocity model September 2017. NAM.
de Roo & Straman (1991)
de Roo, Straman. Numerieke Analyse van de
Schijfwerking in Geprefabriceerde Vloeren.
Cement nr 11, p76-80.
Rota et al. (2010)
M. Rota, A. Penna, G. Magenes. A
methodology for deriving analytical fragility
curves for masonry buildings based on
stochastic nonlinear analyses. Eng Structs 32
(2010) 1312–1323.
Rots et al. (1985)
J.G. Rots, P. Nauta, G.M.A. Kusters, J.
Blaauwendraad. Smeared Crack Approach and
Fracture Localization in Concrete. Heron Vol 30,
No 1.
Rots (1988)
J.G. Rots. Computational Modeling of
Concrete Fracture. Delft U of Tech.
Rots et al. (1994)
J.G. Rots, R. Van Der Pluijm, A.T. Vermeltfoort.
Structural Masonry - An Experimental/
Numerical Basis for Practical Design Rules. CUR
Report 171, CUR, Gouda (Dutch version) See
Rots et al, (1997) for english translation.
Rots et al. (1997)
J.G. Rots, R. Van Der Pluijm, A.T. Vermeltfoort.
Structural Masonry - An Experimental/
Numerical Basis for Practical Design Rules.
Balkema - ISBN 90 5410 680 8.
Rots (2000)
J.G. Rots. Computational Modelling Of
Cracking And Settlement Damage In Masonry
Structures. Faculty of Architecture, Delft U of
Tech.
Rots et al. (2016)
J.G. Rots, F. Messali, R. Esposito, S. Jafari, V.
Mariani. Computational Modelling of Masonry
with a view to Groningen induced Seismicity.
10th SAHC Struct Analysis of Historical
Construction, Leuven.
Rots et al. (2017)
J.G. Rots, F. Messali, R. Esposito, V. Mariani, S.
Jafari. Multi-Scale Approach towards
Groningen Masonry and Induced Seismicity.
Key Eng Mats, 747, 653-661.

303
Rots et al. (2019)
J.G. Rots, S. Invernizzi, B. Belletti, M.A.N.
Hendriks. Circumventing bifurcations in
structural softening. Comput Modeling
Workshop on Conc, Masonry and on Fiberreinforced Composites.
Rots & Blaauwendraad (1989)
J.G. Rots, J. Blaauwendraad. Crack models for
concrete- Discrete, smeared, fixed, multidirectional or rotating. Heron, vol 34 ISSN
0046-7316.
Rots & De Borst (1989)
J.G. Rots, R. De Borst. Analysis Of Concrete
Fracture in "direct" Tension. Inl J Solids Structs
Vol 25 No 12 pp 1381-1394 1989.
Rots & Van Staalduinen (2016)
J.G. Rots, P.C. Van Staalduinen. Plan of
approach NAM/TU Delft Program “Damage
Sensitivity of Groningen Masonry Structures Computational and Experimental Studies”. TU
Delft.
Roy (2019)
A. Roy. Efficient Reliability Analysis Of Concrete
Structures On the Basis Of Non-linear Finite
Element Analysis Under Numerical Noise. TU
Delft.
Rutqvist et al. (2014)
J. Rutqvist, F. Cappa, A.P. Rinaldi, M. Godano.
Modeling of induced seismicity and ground
vibrations associated with geologic CO2
storage, and assessing their effects on surface
structures and human perception. Intl J of
Greenhouse Gas Control 24 (2014) 64–77.
SBR (2010)
SBR. Schade aan gebouwen. SBR.
SBR (2017)
SBR. Trillingsrichtlijn Deel A (2017). SBR.
van der Salm et al. (2012)
R. van der Salm, P. Hölscher, A.J. Snethlage.
SBR-A richtlijn niet eenduidig voor
trillinggevoelige funderingen. Geotechniek.
Salmanpour (2017)
A.H. Salmanpour. Displacement Capacity of
Structural Masonry. ETH Zürich, PhD
Dissertation, 2017.
Salmanpour & Schwartz (2015)
A.H. Salmanpour, N.M.J. Schwartz.
Displacement capacity of contemporary
unreinforced masonry walls: An experimental
study. Eng Structs 89 (2015) 1–16.

Bibliography

References

304

Bibliography

Saloustros et al. (2018)
Grabowski, D. Schermer. Test results on the
S. Saloustros, L. Pelà, M. Cervera, P. Roca. An
behaviour of masonry under static cyclic in
enhanced finite element macro-model for the
plane lateral loads. Esecmase.
realistic simulation of localized cracks in
Schneemayer et al. (2014)
masonry structures: A large-scale application.
A. Schneemayer, C. Schranz, A. Kolbitsch, E.K.
Intl J of Architectural Heritage, 12:3, 432-447.
Tschegg. Fracture Mechanical Properties of
doi.org/10.1080/15583058.2017.1323245
Mortar to Brick Interfaces. J Mater Civ Eng,
San-Bartolomé & Castro-Morán (2009)
2014, 26(9): -1–1, ASCE.
A. San-Bartolomé, A. Castro-Morán.
Schreppers et al. (2016)
Reparación de un Muro de Albañilería
G.M.A. Schreppers, A. Garofano, F. Messali,
confinada. Pontificia Universidad Católica del
J.G. Rots. DIANA validation report for masonry
Perú.
modelling. DIANA FEA report 2016-DIANADe Santis et al. (2018)
R1601 TU Delft Struct Mechs Report
S. De Santis, F. Roscini, G. de Felice. Full-scale
CM-2016-17, 143 pp.
tests on masonry vaults strengthened with Steel Schultz & Mueffelman (2013)
Reinforced Grout. Composites Part B 141
A.E. Schultz, J.G. Mueffelman. Elastic Stability
(2018) 20–36.
of URM Walls Under Transverse Loading. TMS J
De Santis et al. (2019)
September.
S. De Santis, G. de Felice, F. Roscini.
Schwarz & Maiwald (2012)
Retrofitting of Masonry Vaults by Basalt TextileJ. Schwarz, H. Maiwald. Empirical vulnerability
Reinforced Mortar Overlays. INTERNATIONAL
assessment and damage for description natural
JOURNAL OF ARCHITECTURAL HERITAGE.
hazards following the principles of modern
doi.org/10.1080/15583058.2019.1597947
macroseismic scales. 15 WCEE Lisboa, 2012.
Sarhosis et al. (2014)
Seible et al. (1994)
V. Sarhosis, S.W. Garrity, Y. Sheng. Influence of
F. Seible, M.J.N. Priestley, G.R. Kingsley, A.G.
brick–mortar interface on the mechanical
Kürkschübasche. Seismic Response Of Fullbehaviour of low bond strength masonry
scale Five-story Reinforced-masonry Building. J
brickwork lintels. Eng Structs 88 (2015) 1–11.
Struct Eng 1994120:925-946.
Sarhosis et al. (2019)
Shafiei et al. (2016)
V. Sarhosis, D. Dais, E. Smyrou, I.E. Bal.
S. Shafiei, B.W. Melville, A.Y. Shamseldin.
Evaluation of modelling strategies for
Experimental investigation of tsunami bore
estimating cumulative damage on Groningen
impact force and pressure on a square prism.
masonry buildings due to recursive induced
Coastal Eng 110 (2016) 1–16.
earthquakes. Bull of Earthq Eng. doi.org/
Sharafati et al. (2021)
10.1007/s10518-018-00549-1
A. Sharafati, S.B.H.S. Asadollah, N. Al-Ansari.
Satti (1972)
Application of bagging ensemble model for
K.M.H. Satti. Model Brickword Walls Panels
predicting compressive strength of hollow
under Lateral Loading. U of Edinburgh.
concrete masonry prism. Ain Shams Eng J 12
Schauer & Rodriguez (2019)
(2021) 3521–3530. doi.org/10.1016/
M. Schauer, G.R. Rodriguez. A coupled FEMj.asej.2021.03.028
SBFEM approach for soil-structure-interaction
Sharma et al. (2018)
analysis using non-matching meshes at the
S. Sharma, U. Tomassetti, F. Graziotti.
near-field far-field interface. Soil Dyns and
Commentary On Annex H Of Npr 9998 (2018).
Earthq Eng 121 (2019) 466–479.
EUCENTRE, Pavia, Italy.
Scherer (2006)
Sharma et al. (2023)
G.W. Scherer. Internal Stress and Cracking in
S. Sharma, M. Longo, F. Messali. A novel tierStone and Masonry. MS Konsta-Gdoutos, (ed),
based numerical analysis procedure for the
Measuring, Monitoring and Modeling Conc
structural assessment of masonry quay walls
Properties, 633–641. doi
under traffic loads. Front Built Environ
Scheufler et al. (2008)
9:1194658. 10.3389/fbuil.2023.1194658
W. Scheufler, Habil, E.h.K. Zilch, W. Finckh, S.

Sierra-Beltran & Jonkers (2012)
M.G. Sierra-Beltran, H.M. Jonkers. Bio-Based
Mortar For Concrete Repair. 14th Intl Conf
Struct Faults and Repair, Edinburgh, Scotland,
UK, 3-5 July 2012.
Simpson & Grose (1996)
B. Simpson, W.J. Grose. Discussion: The effect
of ground movements on rigid masonry
facades. Geotechnical Aspects of Underground
Construction in Soft Ground, Mair & Taylor
(eds).
Singh (1999)
M.M. Singh. Mining Engineering Book, Mine
Subsidence, Chapter 10.6. Book. doi
Skroumpelou et al. (2018)
G. Skroumpelou, F. Messali, R. Esposito, J.G.
Rots. Mechanical Characterization Of Wall Tie
Connection In Cavity Walls. Australasian
Masonry Conf, Sydney Australia.
Slobbe et al. (2013)
A.T. Slobbe, M.A.N. Hendriks, J.G. Rots.
Systematic assessment of directional mesh bias
with periodic boundary conditions: Applied to
the crack band model. Eng Fracture Mechs,
109, pp 186-208.
Smrkić et al. (2018)
M.F. Smrkić, J. Košćak, D. Damjanović.
Application of 2D digital image correlation for
displacement and crack width measurement on
RC elements. Građevinar 70 (2018) 9, 771-781.
Smyrou et al. (2011)
E. Smyrou, P. Tasiopoulou, I.E. Bal, G. Gazetas.
Ground Motions versus Geotechnical and
Structural Damage in the February 2011
Christchurch Earthquake. Seismological
Research Letters Volume 82, Number 6
November/December 2011.
Sousamli (2024)
M. Sousamli. Orthotropic Cyclic Continuum
Constitutive Model For Masonry Structures and
Comparative Studies. TU Delft.
Son et al. (2014)
H. Son, C. Kim, N. Hwang, C. Kim, Y. Kang.
Classification of major construction materials in
construction environments using ensemble
classifiers. Advanced Eng Informatics 28 (2014)
1–10. doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2013.10.001
Son & Cording (2005)
M. Son, E.J. Cording. Estimation of Building
Damage Due to Excavation-Induced Ground

305
Movements. J Of Geotechnical and
Geoenvironmental Eng.
Son & Cording (2007)
M. Son, E.J. Cording. Evaluation of Building
Stiffness for Building Response Analysis to
Excavation-Induced Ground Movements. J of
Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Eng
133(8).
Soysal & Arici (2023)
B.F. Soysal, Y. Arici. Crack Width - Seismic
Intensity Relationships for Concrete Gravity
Dams. J of Earthq Eng.
10.1080/13632469.2023.2220048
Spence et al. (1999)
R.J.S. Spence, A. Pomonis, P.J. Baxter, A.W.
Coburn, M. White, M. Dayrit. Building Damage
Caused by the Mount Pinatubo Eruption of
June 15, 1991. Department of Architecture, U
of Cambridge.
Spetzler & Dost (2017)
J. Spetzler, B. Dost. Probabilistic Seismic
Hazard Analysis for Induced Earthquakes in
Groningen - Update. KNMI report - PSHA
Groningen, 2017 update.
Spyrakos & Xu (2003)
C.C. Spyrakos, C. Xu. Seismic soil–structure
interaction of massive flexible strip-foundations
embedded in layered soils by hybrid BEM–
FEM. Soil Dyns and Earthq Eng 23 (2003) 383–
389.
Van Staalduinen et al. (2018)
P.C. Van Staalduinen, K. Terwel, J.G. Rots.
Onderzoek naar de oorzaken van bouwkundige
schade in Groningen Methodologie en case
studies ter duiding van de oorzaken.. Delft U of
Tech Report number CM-2018-01, 11 July 2018
- Downloadable from
wwwNationaalCoordinatorGroningennl.
Van Staalduinen & Smits (1993)
P.C. Van Staalduinen, M.T.J.H. Smits.
Trillingscriteria voor schade aan gebouwen.
TNO.
Stafford et al. (2019)
P.J. Stafford, B.D. Zurek, M. Ntinalexis, J.J.
Bommer. Extensions to the Groningen groundmotion model for seismic risk calculations:
component-to-component variability and
spatial correlation. Bull of Earthq Eng (2019)
17:4417–4439. doi.org/10.1007/
s10518-018-0425-6

Bibliography

References

306
Stagg et al. (1984)
M.S. Stagg, D.E. Siskind, M.G. Stevens, C.H.
Dowding. Effects of Repeated Blasting on a
Wood-Frame House. US Department of Interior
- Office of Surface Mining.
Steenbergen et al. (2015)
R.D.J.M. Steenbergen, A.C.W.M.
Vrouwenvelder, N.P.M. Scholten.
Veiligheidsbeschouwing aardbevingen
Groningen t.b.v. NPR 9998. TNO.
Steenbergen et al. (2017)
R.D.J.M. Steenbergen, R.D.J.M. Steenbergen,
I. van Straalen, A.C.W.M. Vrouwenvelder.
Background Report Draft NPR 9998:2017 Part
A: Terminology and Safety Philosophy. NEN.
Steenbergen & Geurts (2016)
R.D.J.M. Steenbergen, C.P.W. Geurts. Relatie
tussen PGA waarden en kans op schade voor
geïnduceerde aardbevingen in Groningen.
TNO.
Stryszewska & Kanka (2019)
T. Stryszewska, S. Kanka. Forms of Damage of
Bricks Subjected to Cyclic Freezing and
Thawing in Actual Conditions. Mats 2019, 12,
1165. 10.3390/ma12071165
Sucuoglu (2013)
H. Sucuoglu. Implications of Masonry Infill and
Partition Damage in Performance Perception in
Residential Buildings after a Moderate
Earthquake. Earthq Spectra, Volume 29, No 2,
pages 661–667, May 2013. 10.1193/1.4000147
Suhairy (2000)
S.A. Suhairy. Prediction of Ground Vibration
from Railways. SP Swedish National Testing and
Research Institute.
Sullivan et al. (2004)
T.J. Sullivan, R. Pinho, A. Pavese. An
Introduction to Structural Testing Techniques in
Earthquake Engineering. ROSE School Collegio
Alessandro Volta.
Sullivan et al. (2013)
T.J. Sullivan, P.M. Calvi, R. Nascimbene.
Towards improved floor spectra estimates for
seismic design. Earthqs and Structs, Vol 4, No 1
(2013) 109-132.
Suppasri et al. (2013)
A. Suppasri, E. Mas, I. Charvet, R. Gunasekera,
K. Imai, Y. Fukutani, Y. Abe, F. Imamura.
Building damage characteristics based on
surveyed data and fragility curves of the 2011
Great East Japan tsunami. Nat Hzrds (2013)

Bibliography
66:319–341 DOI. doi.org/10.1007/
s11069-012-0487-8
Svinkin (1999)
M.R. Svinkin. Prediction and Calculation of
Construction Vibrations. Deep Foundations
Institute.
Svinkin (2013)
M.R. Svinkin. Forensic engineering of
construction vibrations. Forensic Eng.
Sweeney et al. (2005)
S.C. Sweeney, M.A. Horney, S.L. Orton. Seismic
Response of a Half-Scale Masonry Building with
Flexible Diaphragms. Erdc/cerl Tr-05-25.
Tarbotton et al. (2015)
C. Tarbotton, F. Dall'Osso, D. Dominey-Howes,
J. Goff. The use of empirical vulnerability
functions to assess the response of buildings to
tsunami impact: Comparative review and
summary of best practice. Earth-Science
Reviews 142 (2015) 120–134.
Tedesco et al. (2016)
F. Tedesco, A. Bilotta, E. Turcoa. Multiscale 3D
mixed FEM analysis of historical masonry
constructions. European J of Environmental
and Civil Eng, 2016 dx. doi.org/
10.1080/19648189.2015.1134676
Tena-Colunga et al. (2015)
A. Tena-Colunga, K.L. Chinchilla-Portillo, G.
Juárez-Luna. Assessment of the diaphragm
condition for floor systems used in urban
buildings. Eng Structs, 93, p70-84.
Thamboo et al. (2013)
J.A. Thamboo, M. Dhanasekar, C. Yan. Flexural
and shear bond characteristics of thin layer
polymer cement mortared concrete masonry.
Construction and Bldg Mats 46 (2013) 104–
113.
Thamboo & Dhanasekar (2015)
J.A. Thamboo, M. Dhanasekar. Characterisation
of thin layer polymer cement mortared
concrete masonry bond. Construction and Bldg
Mats 82 (2015) 71–80.
Theodossopoulos et al. (2014)
D. Theodossopoulos, J. Sanderson, M. Scott.
Strengthening masonry cross vaults damaged
by geometric instability. Key Eng Mats ISSN:
1662-9795, Vol 624, pp 635-643.
van Thienen-Visser & Breunese (2015)
K. van Thienen-Visser, J.N. Breunese. Induced
seismicity of the Groningen gas field: History
and recent developments. THE LEADING

EDGE June 2015 Special Section: Injectioninduced seismicity dx. doi.org/10.1190/
tle34060664.1.
Thijssen (1999)
C.C.F. Thijssen. Bouwconstructieve Analyse Van
Naoor- Logse Eengezinsbui- Zen in De Nonprofit Huursector 1946-1980. Delft U of Tech
Press.
Tiel et al. (2022)
B.v. Tiel, U. Sauerland, M. Franke. Meaning and
Use in the Expression of Estimative Probability.
Open Mind: Discoveries in Cognitive Science,
6, 250–263. doi.org/10.1162/opmi_a_00066
Tomassetti et al. (2017a)
U. Tomassetti, S. Kallioras, F. Graziotti, A.A.
Correia. Preliminary report on the construction
of the building prototype at the LNEC
laboratory. Lisbon, March 2017.
Tomassetti (2017)
U. Tomassetti. Selection of Vertical Acceleration
Time-Series for Shake Table Testing of
Groningen Masonry Building at LNEC.
EUCENTRE.
Tomassetti et al. (2017b)
U. Tomassetti, A.A. Correia, F. Graziotti, A.I.
Marques, M. Mandirola, P.X. Candeias.
Collapse Shaking Table Test On A Urm Cavity
Wall Structure Representative Of A Dutch
Terraced House. EUCENTRE.
Tomassetti et al. (2017c)
U. Tomassetti, A.A. Correia, A. Marques, F.
Graziotti, A. Penna, G. Magenes. Dynamic
collapse testing of a full-scale URM cavity-wall
structure. Anidis 2017, Pistoia.
Tomassetti et al. (2018)
U. Tomassetti, A.A. Correia, P.X. Candeias, F.
Graziotti, A.C. Costa. Two-way bending out-ofplane collapse of a full-scale URM building
tested on a shake table. Bull of Earthq Eng.
doi.org/10.1007/s10518-018-0507-5
Tomazevic (2007)
M. Tomazevic. Damage as a measure for
earthquake-resistant design of masonry
structures: Slovenian experience. Can J Civ Eng
34: 1403–1412 (2007).
Tondelli et al. (2013)
M. Tondelli, S. Petry, S. Peloso, K. Beyer. Shaketable test on a four-storey structure with
reinforced concrete and unreinforced masonry
walls. Vienna Congress on Recent Advcs in

307
Earthq Eng and Struct Dyns 2013 (VEESD
2013).
Trifunac (1971)
M.D. Trifunac. Zero Baseline Correction Of
Strong-Motion Accelerograms. Bull of the
Seismological Soc of America Vol 61, No 5, pp
1201-1211 October, 1971.
Tung et al. (2008)
S. Tung, M. Shih, W. Sung. Development of
digital image correlation method to analyse
crack variations of masonry wall. Sadhana Vol
33, Part 6, December 2008, pp 767–779.
Turner et al. (2012)
F. Turner, K. Elwood, M. Griffith, J. Ingham, J.
Marshall. Performance of Retrofitted
Unreinforced Masonry Buildings during the
Christchurch Earthquake Sequence. Asces.
Tziviloglou et al. (2017)
E. Tziviloglou, Z. Pan, H.M. Jonkers, E.
Schlangen. Bio-based Self-healing Mortar: An
Experimental and Numerical Study. J of
Advanced Conc Tech Vol 15, 536-543,
September 2017.
Uva et al. (2012)
G. Uva, F. Porco, A. Fiore. Appraisal of masonry
infill walls effect in the seismic response of RC
framed buildings: A case study. Eng Structs 34
(2012) 514–526.
Vaculik & Griffith (2016)
J. Vaculik, M. Griffith. Shaketable Tests on
Masonry Walls in Two-Way Bending. Dept of
Civil and Environmental Eng, U of Adelaide.
Vaculik & Griffith (2017a)
J. Vaculik, M.C. Griffith. Out-of-plane load–
displacement model for two-way spanning
masonry walls. Eng Structs 141 (2017) 328–343.
Vaculik & Griffith (2017b)
J. Vaculik, M.C. Griffith. Out-of-plane
shaketable testing of unreinforced masonry
walls in two-way bending. Bull Earthq Eng.
doi.org/10.1007/s10518-017-0282-8
Vandoren et al. (2012)
B. Vandoren, K. de Proft, A. Simone, B. Sluys.
Modelling of Crack Initiation and Propagation
using the Partition of Unity Method. VIII Intl
Conf on Fracture Mechs of Conc and Conc
Structs FraMCoS-8.
Vasconcelos & Lourenço (2006)
G. Vasconcelos, P.B. Lourenço. Assessment of
the in-plane shear strength of stone masonry

Bibliography

References

308
walls by simplified models. Struct Analysis of
Historical Constrcs, New Delhi 2006.
Vasconcelos & Lourenço (2009)
G. Vasconcelos, P.B. Lourenço. In-Plane
Experimental Behavior of Stone Masonry Walls
under Cyclic Loading. J Struct Eng
2009135:1269-1277.
Vecchio & Collins (1986)
F.J. Vecchio, M.P. Collins. The modified
compression field theory for reinforced
concrete elements subjected to shear.. ACI J
83, 22 (1986), 219-231.
de Vent et al. (2011)
I. de Vent, J.G. Rots, R.P.J. van Hees. Structural
Damage in Masonry - Developing diagnostic
decision support. TU Delft.
de Vent (2011)
I. de Vent. Prototype of a diagnostic decision
support tool for Structural damage in masonry.
Delft U of Tech, Faculty of Architecture ISBN:
978-90-8570-760-8.
Vermeltfoort (2005)
A.T. Vermeltfoort. Brick-mortar interaction in
masonry under compression. Eindhoven:
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven. doi.org/
10.6100/IR589402
Van Verseveld et al. (2015)
H.C.W. Van Verseveld, A.R. Van Dongeren,
N.G. Plant, W.S.J.C. Den Heijer. Modelling
multi-hazard hurricane damages on an
urbanized coast with a Bayesian Network
approach. Coastal Eng 103 (2015) 1–14.
Verstrynge et al. (2016)
E. Verstrynge, K. De Wilder, L. BejaranoUrrego, E. Voet, K. Van Balen. Advanced
techniques for monitoring of settlementinduced deformations and crack growth in
historical masonry. Struct Analysis of Historical
Constrcs – Anamnesis, diagnosis, therapy,
controls – Van Balen & Verstrynge (Eds) © 2016
Taylor & Francis Group, London,
ISBN978-1-138-02951-4.
Verstrynge et al. (2020)
E. Verstrynge, G. Lacidogna, F. Accornero, A.
Tomor. A review on acoustic emission
monitoring for damage detection in masonry
structures. Construction and Bldg Mats.
Vlachakis (2017)
G. Vlachakis. Out-of-plane simulation of
masonry structures using novel finite element
techniques. Erasmus Mundus.

Bibliography
Vlek (2018)
C. Vlek. Induced Earthquakes from Long-Term
Gas Extraction in Groningen, the Netherlands:
Statistical Analysis and Prognosis for
Acceptable-Risk Regulation. Risk Analysis, Vol
38, No 7, 2018.
Van Vliet (2004)
M.R.A. Van Vliet. Shear tests on masonry
panels; Literature survey and proposal for
experiments. TNO report 2004-CI-R0171.
Voigt et al. (2016)
S. Voigt, F. Giulio-Tonolo, J. Lyons, J. Kučera, B.
Jones, T. Schneiderhan, G. Platzeck, K. Kaku,
M.K. Hazarika, L. Czaran, S. Li, W. Pedersen,
G.K. James, C. Proy, D.M. Muthike, J.
Bequignon, D. Guha-Sapir. Global trends in
satellite-based emergency mapping. Science
Magazine VOL 353 ISSUE 6296. doi
van der Voort & Vanclay (2014)
N. van der Voort, F. Vanclay. Social impacts of
earthquakes caused by gas extraction in the
Province of Groningen, The Netherlands.
Environmental Impact Assessment Review 50
(2015) 1–15. doi.org/10.1016/j.eiar.2014.08.008
de Waal et al. (2015)
J.A. de Waal, A.G. Muntendam-Bos, J.P.A.
Roest. Production induced subsidence and
seismicity in the Groningen gas field – can it be
managed?. Proc IAHS, 372, 129–139, 2015
proc-iahsnet/372/129/2015. doi.org/10.5194/
piahs-372-129-2015
Waarts (1997)
P. Waarts. Kans op schade aan bouwwerken
door trillingen. TNO.
Wald et al. (1999)
D.J. Wald, V. Quitoriano, T.H. Heaton, H.
Kanamori. Relationships between Peak Ground
Acceleration, Peak Ground Velocity and
Modified Mercalli Intensity in California. Earthq
Spectra, Volume 15, No 3, August 1999.
Walsh et al. (2014)
K. Walsh, D. Dizhur, J. Shafaei, H. Derakhshan,
J. Ingham. Out-of-Plane In-Situ Testing of
Masonry Cavity Walls in As-Built and Improved
Conditions. Australian Earthq Eng Soc 2014
Conf, Nov 21-23, Lorne, Victoria.
Walsh et al. (2015)
K.Q. Walsh, D.Y. Dizhur, J. Shafaei, H.
Derakhshan, J.M. Ingham. In Situ Out-of-Plane
Testing of Unreinforced Masonry Cavity Walls in

as-Built and Improved Conditions. Structs 3
(2015) 187–199.
Walsh et al. (2016)
K.Q. Walsh, D.Y. Dizhur, J.M. Ingham.
Estimating Thrust Forces Resulting from
Arching Action of Clay Brick Masonry Infill. J
Struct Eng, 06016003.
Walsh et al. (2017a)
K. Walsh, D. Dizhur, I. Giongo, H. Derakhshan,
J. Ingham. Comparison Between Predicted
Urm Wall Out-of-plane Strength- Based
Capacity and in Situ Proof Test Results. 13th
Canadian Masonry Symp Halifax, Canada.
Walsh et al. (2017b)
K.Q. Walsh, D.Y. Dizhur, I. Giongo, H.
Derakhshan, J.M. Ingham. Effect Of Boundary
Conditions and Other Factors On Urm Wall
Out-of-plane Behaviour: Design Demands,
Predicted Capacity, and in Situ Proof Test
Results. SESOC J Volume 30 No1 April 2017.
Wang et al. (2012a)
S.Y. Wang, S.W. Sloan, A.J. Abbo, M.J. Masia,
C.A. Tang. Numerical simulation of the failure
process of unreinforced masonry walls due to
concentrated static and dynamic loading. Intl J
of Solids and Structs 49 (2012) 377–394.
Wang et al. (2012b)
T. Wang, X. Chen, W. Li, Q. Miao. Seismic
Performance of Masonry Buildings Retrofitted
by Pre-Cast RC Panels. Applied Mechs and
Mats. doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/
AMM.166-169.1811
Wassing & Dost (2012)
B.B.T. Wassing, B. Dost. Seismisch hazard van
geïnduceerde aardbevingen - Integratie van
deelstudies. TNO/KNMI.
Wijanto (2007)
L.S. Wijanto. Seismic Assessment of
Unreinforced Masonry Walls. Department of
Civil Eng U of Canterbury Christchurch, New
Zealand.
Van Wijnbergen (2015)
E. Van Wijnbergen. Seismic retrofit - an
architectural approach for the situation in
Groningen. Delft U of Tech.
Willis (2004)
C.R. Willis. Design of Unreinforced Masonry
Walls for Out-of-plane Loading. School of Civil
and Environmental Eng, The U of Adelaide.
Willis et al. (2004)
C.R. Willis, M.C. Griffith, S.J. Lawrence.

309
Horizontal Bending of Unreinforced Clay Brick
Masonry. Masonry Intl Vol 17, No 3.
Willis et al. (2010)
C.R. Willis, R. Seracino, M.C. Griffith. Out-ofplane strength of brick masonry retrofitted with
horizontal NSM CFRP strips. Eng Structs 32
(2010) 547–555.
Wilson et al. (2011)
A. Wilson, P. Quenneville, J. Ingham.
Assessment of timber floor diaphragms in
historic unreinforced masonry buildings.
Department of Civil and Environmental Eng,
The U of Auckland.
Wilson et al. (2014)
A. Wilson, P.J.H. Quenneville, J.M. Ingham. InPlane Orthotropic Behavior of Timber Floor
Diaphragms in Unreinforced Masonry Buildings.
J Struct Eng, 2014, 140(1): 04013038.
Wojciechowska et al. (2015)
K. Wojciechowska, G. Pleijter, M. Zethof, F.J.
Havinga, D.H. Van Haaren, W.L.A. Ter-Horst.
Application of Fragility Curves in Operational
Flood Risk Assessment. Geotechnical Safety
and Risk V T Schweckendiek et al (Eds).
doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-580-7-528
Xu & Zhu (2009)
S. Xu, Y. Zhu. Experimental determination of
fracture parameters for crack propagation in
hardening cement paste and mortar. Int J Fract
(2009) 157:33–43 DOI. doi.org/10.1007/
s10704-009-9315-x
Yang et al. (2017)
T.Y. Yang, K. Li, J. Lin, Y. Yi, D.P. Tung, J.
Fawcett. Advanced shake table controler
design using model predictive strategy. 16th
World Conf on Earthq Eng, 16WCEE 2017.
Yi (2004)
T. Yi. Experimental Investigation and Numerical
Simulation Of an Unreinforced Masonry
Structure With Flexible Diaphragms. Georgia
Institute of Tech.
Yi et al. (2006a)
T. Yi, F.L. Moon, R.T. Leon, L.F. Kahn. Analyses
of a Two-Story Unreinforced Masonry Building.
J Struct Eng 2006132:653-662.
Yi et al. (2006b)
T. Yi, F.L. Moon, R.T. Leon, L.F. Kahn. Lateral
Load Tests on a Two-Story Unreinforced
Masonry Building. J Struct Eng
2006132:643-652.

Bibliography

References

310

Bibliography

Younis et al. (2020)
A. Younis, A.S. Ramadan, L.S. Wong, M.L.
Nehdi. New rational test for reinforcedconcrete pipe eliminating subjective crackwidth criteria. Structs 28 (2020) 2507–2522.
doi.org/10.1016/j.istruc.2020.10.076
Zhai et al. (2016)
C. Zhai, J. Kong, X. Wang, Z. Chen.
Experimental and finite element analytical
investigation of seismic behavior of full-scale
masonry infilled RC frames. J of Earthq Eng.
doi.org/10.1080/13632469.2016.1138171
Zhu (2006)
Y. Zhu. Breach Growth in Clay-Dikes. Delft U of
Tech.
van Zijl et al. (2001)
G.P.A.G. van Zijl, R. de Borst, J.G. Rots. The
Physical Role of Crack Rate Dependence in the
Long-Term Behaviour of Cementitious

Materials. Intl J Solids & Structs 38, pp
5063-5079.
Zuccaro et al. (2010)
G. Zuccaro, F. Cacace, M. Rauci. A Multimedia
and didactic handbook for seismic Damage
evaluation. Urban Habitat Constrcs under
Catastrophic Events.
Zucchini & Lourenço (2006)
A. Zucchini, P.B. Lourenço. Homogenization of
Masonry Using a Micro-mechanical Model
Compressive Behaviour. III European Conf on
Comput Mechs Solids, Structs and Coupled
Problems in Eng CA.
Červenka et al. (1998)
J. Červenka, J.M.C. Kishen, V.E. Saouma.
Mixed Mode Fracture of Cementitious
Bimaterial Interfaces. Eng Fracture Mechs Vol
60, No 1, pp 95±107.

List of Authors
The following is a list containing all the authors consulted in the referenced
publications. The entry for each author includes their last name, initials,
publication year or range of years of the consulted works, and number of
consulted works (in parenthesis).
Abbati, S.D. 2015 (1)
Abbiati, G. 2017,2018 (2)
Abbo, A.J. 2012 (1)
Abo-El-Ezz, A. 2013 (1)
Abrams, D.P. 1996 (1)
Accornero, F. 2020 (1)
Acikgoz, S. 2023 (1)
Acosta, D.Y. 2016 (1)
Adair, B. 2015 (1)
Adam, J.M. 2016 (1)
Addenbrooke, T.I. 1997 (1)
AeDES, 2007 (1)
Aguilar, V. 2016 (1)
Akhaveissy, A.H. 2012,2013 (2)
Al-Ansari, N. 2021 (1)
Albanesi, L. 2018 (1)
Albert, V. 2010 (1)
Alberto, A. 2011 (1)
Aldemir, A. 2015 (1)
Alemi, F. 2008 (1)
Allen, C. 2015 (1)

Almeida, J.C. 1999,2012 (2)
Alves, S. 2015 (1)
Anania, L. 2012-2014 (3)
Anthoine, A. 1995,2008 (2)
Antonaci, P. 2011 (1)
Antoniou, A. 2015 (1)
Anzani, A. 2004 (1)
Aravind, H.B. 2019 (1)
Aref, A.J. 2011,2015 (2)
Argiento, L.U. 2016 (2)
Arias, A. 1970 (1)
Arici, Y. 2023 (1)
Arnesen, A. 1998 (1)
Arup, 2013-2018 (7)
Arya, A.S. 2013 (1)
Arêde, A. 2007-2015 (4)
Asadollah, S.B.H.S. 2021 (1)
Astroza, M. 2012 (1)
Atimtay, E. 2006 (1)
Atkinson, G.M. 2015 (1)
Attard, M.M. 2009 (1)

Aussem, A. 2016 (1)
Badalà, A. 2014 (1)
Badoux, M. 2005-2016 (3)
Bahrampouri, M. 2022 (1)
Baills, A. 2014 (1)
Bakar, B.H.A. 2009 (1)
Bakema, M.M. 2018 (1)
Baker, J.W. 2019 (1)
Bal, I.E. 2011-2021 (4)
Van Balen, K. 2016 (1)
Banting, B.R. 2013 (1)
Barros, J.A. 2003-2012 (3)
Barry, G. 2015 (1)
Basilio, I. 2014 (1)
Baxter, P.J. 1999 (1)
Beattie, G. 2007 (1)
Beazley, P.L. 2017 (1)
Beck, 2008 (1)
Behnamfar, F. 2015 (1)
Benedetti, D. 1998 (1)
Bibimoune, M. 2016 (1)

Bilotta, A. 2016 (1)
Binda, L. 2004 (2)
Bindiganavile-Ramadas, S. 2018
(1)
Binici, B. 2015 (1)
Bird, J.F. 2006 (1)
Blaauwendraad, J. 1985-1995
(3)
Blaber, J. 2015 (1)
Blong, R. 2003 (1)
Boen, T. 2013 (1)
de Boer, S.J. 2016 (1)
de Boer, A. 2014 (1)
Bommer, J.J. 1998-2022 (23)
Bonaldo, D. 2016 (1)
Bonaldo, E. 2003 (1)
Boonpichetvong, M. 2004 (1)
de Borst, R. 1989,2001 (2)
Borzi, B. 2001,2008 (2)
van den Bos, A. 2016 (1)
Boscardin, M.D. 1989 (1)
Bosiljkov, V. 2008,2015 (2)
Boulanger, R.W. 2014 (1)
Bourne, S.J. 2015-2020 (5)
BouwenmetStaal, 2015 (1)
Boyd, S.W. 2013 (1)
Brando, G. 2014,2020 (2)
Bray, 2008 (1)
Breedeveld, J. 2013 (1)
Breunese, J.N. 2015 (1)
Broccardo, M. 2017,2018 (2)
Broms, B.B. 1977 (1)
Bunyan, J. 2015 (1)
Burd, H. 2023 (1)
Burland, J.B. 1974-2001 (3)
Burnett, S. 2007 (1)
Busschers, F.S. 2017 (1)
CUR, 1990 (1)
Caballero-Gonzaléz, A. 2019 (1)
Cacace, F. 2010 (1)
Caccavale, M. 2013 (1)
Calderini, C. 2008,2015 (2)
Calduran, 2004 (1)
Calvi, G.M. 1992-2006 (6)
Calvi, P.M. 2013 (1)
Camp, W.M. 2013 (1)
Campos-Costa, A. 2008,2018
(2)
Can, Ö. 2010 (1)
Canbay, E. 2015 (1)
Candeias, P.X. 2008-2018 (3)

311
Cappa, F. 2014 (1)
Carydis, P. 1998 (1)
Casadei, P. 2016 (1)
Casati, M.J. 2008 (1)
Cascini, L. 2015-2017 (3)
Castellani, A. 1986,1988 (2)
Castellazzi, G. 2017 (2)
Castro-Morán, A. 2009 (1)
Cattari, S. 2008-2024 (4)
Caudron, M. 2008 (1)
Causevic, M. 2010 (1)
Cavalagli, N. 2020 (1)
Cavalieri, F. 2019 (1)
Cenja, E. 2015 (1)
Centeno, J. 2011 (1)
Ceran, H.B. 2013 (1)
Cervera, M. 2014,2018 (2)
Chacko, J. 2018,2019 (2)
Chaimoon, K. 2009 (1)
Charrier, J.S. 2012 (1)
Charvet, I. 2013 (1)
Chen, Z. 2016 (1)
Chen, X. 2012 (1)
Chinchilla-Portillo, K.L. 2015 (1)
Chiozzi, A. 2017 (1)
Chiumenti, M. 2014 (1)
Chong, V.L. 1993 (1)
Choong, K.K. 2009 (1)
Chopra, A.K. 1999 (1)
Chuang, S. 2004 (1)
Chummar, A.V. 1984 (1)
Chung, L. 2016 (1)
Coburn, A.W. 1999 (1)
Coelho, E. 2008 (1)
Colangelo, F. 2015 (1)
Collins, M.P. 1986 (1)
Contzen, N. 2023 (1)
Cording, E.J. 1989-2007 (3)
Cornelissen, H.A.W. 1986 (1)
Correa, M.R.S. 2007,2009 (2)
Correia, A.A. 2017-2018 (5)
Costa, A.A. 2007-2018 (10)
Costley, A.C. 1996 (1)
Cotecchia, F. 2016 (1)
Cotič, P. 2015 (1)
Courage, W. 2015 (1)
Crammond, G. 2013 (1)
Criber, E. 2014 (1)
Crowley, H. 2004-2019 (11)
Curtin, 2008 (1)
Custer, R. 2015 (1)

Czaran, L. 2016 (1)
D'Agata, G. 2012 (1)
Dainotti, S. 2017 (1)
Dais, D. 2018-2021 (3)
Dalgic, K.D. 2023 (1)
Dall'Osso, F. 2015 (1)
Damiola, M. 2018 (1)
Damjanović, D. 2018 (1)
Damoni, C. 2014 (1)
Danciu, L. 2017 (1)
Datoussaid, S. 2012 (1)
Dayrit, M. 1999 (1)
DeCanio, G. 2016 (1)
DeJong, M.J. 2009-2020 (5)
DeSantis, S. 2016 (1)
Debailleux, L. 2019 (1)
Deckner, F. 2013 (1)
van Dedem, E. 2017-2019 (3)
Degée, H. 2008 (1)
Dehghan-Niri, E. 2013 (1)
Delgado, R. 2008 (1)
Dempsey, D. 2017 (1)
Denoel, V. 2008 (1)
Derakhshan, H. 2011-2018 (11)
Dhanasekar, M. 2013-2019 (3)
Dickie, J. 2011 (1)
Didier, M. 2017,2018 (2)
Dizhur, D. 2010-2019 (17)
Doherty, K. 2000-2004 (4)
Dolan, C.W. 1998 (1)
Dolatshahi, K.M. 2011,2015 (2)
Dolšek, M. 2008 (1)
Dominey-Howes, D. 2015 (1)
Van Dongeren, A.R. 2015 (1)
Dorji, J. 2019 (1)
Dornaika, F. 2014 (1)
Dost, B. 2012-2022 (10)
Douglas, J. 2013 (1)
Dowding, C.H. 1984 (1)
Drosos, V. 2018,2019 (2)
Dudine, A. 2016 (1)
Dulieu-Barton, J.M. 2013 (1)
Dungca, J.R. 2016 (1)
D’Agata, G. 2014 (2)
D’Altri, A.M. 2017 (3)
EQC, 2006 (1)
Easterbrook, 2008 (1)
van Eck, T. 2013 (1)
Edward, B. 2020 (1)
Edwards, B. 2015-2022 (8)
El-Dakhakhni, W.W. 2013 (1)

Bibliography

References

312
ElGawady, M.A. 2005-2016 (3)
Elefante, L. 2009 (1)
Elghazel, H. 2016 (1)
van Elk, J. 2015-2022 (24)
Ellsworth, W.L. 2016 (1)
Elmenshawi, A.E. 2010 (1)
Elwood, K. 2012 (1)
Emeriault, F. 2008 (1)
Emeriault, 2013 (1)
Erberik, M.A. 2013 (1)
Erdal, M. 2010 (2)
van Es, J. 2016 (1)
Eslami, S. 2015 (1)
Esposito, R. 2016-2024 (22)
Eucentre, 2015 (1)
Evangeliou, P. 2016 (1)
Ewing, B.D. 2004 (1)
Fabriece, 2013 (1)
Faccioli, E. 2001 (1)
Fajfar, P. 2008 (1)
Farhidzadeh, A. 2013 (1)
Farrell, R. 2014 (1)
Fathy, A.M. 2008 (1)
Fawcett, J. 2017 (1)
Fedele, R. 2014 (1)
Feenstra, P.H. 1998 (1)
de Felice, G. 2018,2019 (2)
Fema, 2000-2020 (4)
Fernandes, R.P. 2012 (1)
Fernandez, R. 2010 (1)
Ferreira, T.M. 2015 (1)
Ferretti, F. 2018 (2)
Ferris, M.C. 2001 (1)
Finckh, W. 2008 (1)
Fiore, A. 2012-2014 (3)
Fischer, G. 2008 (1)
Foraboschi, P. 2009 (1)
Forbes, R.H. 2013 (1)
Forrest, J.A. 1999 (1)
Fragomeli, A. 2016 (1)
Franchin, P. 2009 (1)
Franke, M. 2022 (1)
Franza, A. 2020 (1)
Friedland, C.J. 2009 (1)
Fuchs, S. 2014 (1)
Fuente, J.V. 2010 (1)
Fukutani, Y. 2013 (1)
Furtado, A. 2015 (1)
Gad, E.F. 2008 (1)
Gagliardo, R. 2018 (1)
Gajewski, M. 2015 (1)

Bibliography
Galasco, A. 2010,2013 (2)
Gams, M. 2014 (1)
Garbin, E. 2010 (1)
Garcia, F. 2012 (1)
García-Macías, E. 2019 (1)
Garofano, A. 2016 (1)
Garrity, S.W. 2014 (1)
Garzón-Roca, J. 2016 (1)
Gattesco, N. 2016 (1)
Del Gaudio, C. 2017 (1)
Gazetas, G. 1991-2011 (3)
Gehl, P. 2013 (1)
Gehri, N. 2020 (1)
Van Gelder, P.H.A.J.M. 2003 (1)
Gems, B. 2014 (1)
Geurts, C.P.W. 2016 (1)
Ghandil, M. 2015 (1)
Ghobarah, A. 2004 (1)
Ghorbani, R. 2015 (1)
Giannakou, A. 2018,2019 (2)
Giaquinta, C. 2012,2014 (2)
Giardina, G. 2008-2020 (8)
Giaretton, M. 2015-2017 (5)
Gil, L. 2014 (1)
Gilbert, M. 2002,2007 (2)
Gill, J.C. 2014 (1)
Gilstrap, J.M. 1998 (1)
Giongo, I. 2014-2019 (5)
Giulio-Tonolo, F. 2016 (1)
Giuriani, G. 2012 (1)
Giusto, S. 2024 (1)
Glascoe, L. 2009 (1)
Godano, M. 2014 (1)
Godio, M. 2019 (1)
Goel, R.K. 1999 (1)
Goff, J. 2015 (1)
Goldsworthy, H. 2018 (1)
van de Graaf, A.V. 2011,2013
(2)
Grabowski, S. 2008 (1)
Grant, D. 2015 (1)
Graziotti, F. 2015-2019 (19)
Green, R.A. 2017-2020 (3)
Griffith, M.C. 2000-2018 (24)
Groot, C.J.W.P. 2004 (1)
de Groot, A. 2019 (1)
Grose, W.J. 1996 (1)
Grottoli, L. 2017-2019 (3)
Grünberg, J. 2005 (1)
Grünthal, G. 1998 (1)
Guedes, J. 2008 (1)

Guerreiro, J. 2012 (1)
Guerrini, G. 2016-2018 (4)
Guha-Sapir, D. 2016 (1)
Guidi, G. 2010 (1)
Gulen, B. 2023 (1)
Gunasekera, R. 2013 (1)
Gunnink, J.L. 2017 (2)
Gupta, A. 2019 (1)
Gálvez, J.C. 2008 (1)
Gálvez, F. 2017 (1)
De Haan, F.S. 2016 (1)
Van Haaren, D.H. 2015 (1)
Habil, 2008 (1)
Hadzima-Nyarko, M. 2020 (1)
Hak, S. 2017 (1)
van den Ham, G.A. 2013 (1)
Hamed, E. 2010 (1)
Han, Y. 2004-2009 (3)
Hancock, J. 2004,2006 (2)
Hanley, R. 2010 (1)
Harting, R. 2017 (1)
Hashemi, S.J. 2011 (1)
Hatzigeorgiou, G.D. 2010 (1)
Hazarika, M.K. 2016 (1)
Heath, D.J. 2008 (1)
Heaton, T.H. 1999 (1)
van Hees, R.P.J. 2004-2011 (3)
Hefti, F. 2018 (1)
Al Heib, M. 2008,2013 (2)
Den Heijer, W.S.J.C. 2015 (1)
Hendriks, M.A.N. 1995-2019
(15)
Hendry, E.A.W. 2001 (1)
Hernandez, E.O. 2022 (1)
Den Hertog, D. 2018 (1)
Den Hertog, P.D. 2017 (1)
Hildebrand, R. 2008 (1)
Hillerborg, A. 1985 (1)
Hobbs, B. 2002,2007 (2)
Hoiseth, K.V. 1998 (1)
Hojdys, Ł. 2014 (1)
Holscher, P. 2013 (1)
Hordijk, D.A. 1986 (1)
Horney, M.A. 2005 (1)
Hossiney, N. 2019 (1)
Huissoon, H. 2019 (1)
Hwang, N. 2014 (1)
Hölscher, P. 2012 (1)
Idriss, I.M. 2014 (1)
Iervolino, I. 2009 (1)
Ilki, A. 2023 (1)

Imai, K. 2013 (1)
Imamura, F. 2013 (1)
Ingham, J. 2010-2019 (24)
Invernizzi, S. 2011,2019 (2)
Ip, K. 2017 (1)
Ishiyama, Y. 2013 (1)
Ismail, N. 2010 (1)
J.Y. Kim, 2014 (1)
Jaeger, L.G. 2010 (1)
Jafari, S. 2015-2019 (11)
Jain, S.K. 2007 (1)
Jalayer, F. 2009 (1)
James, G.K. 2016 (1)
Jansen, 1990 (1)
Jardine, F.M. 2001 (1)
Jeary, A.P. 2015 (1)
Jonaitis, B. 2009 (1)
Jones, B. 2016 (1)
Jongejan, R. 2019 (1)
Jonkers, H.M. 2012-2017 (3)
Jonkman, S.N. 2003-2015 (4)
Juego, M.B. 2016 (1)
Jurevicius, D. 2015 (1)
Jurina, L. 2019 (1)
Jury, R.D. 2017 (1)
Juárez-Luna, G. 2015 (1)
Kahn, L.F. 2006 (3)
Kaku, K. 2016 (1)
Kallioras, S. 2015-2019 (7)
Kam, W.Y. 2017 (1)
de Kam, G. 2018 (1)
Kanamori, H. 1999 (1)
Kang, Y. 2014 (1)
Kanit, R. 2006,2010 (2)
Kanka, S. 2019 (1)
Karaoulis, M. 2018 (1)
Kashyap, J. 2014 (1)
Kaufmann, W. 2020 (1)
Kaushik, H.B. 2007 (1)
Keiler, M. 2014 (1)
Kelman, I. 2002,2004 (2)
Keskinen, E. 2008 (1)
von Ketlehodt, J. 2018 (1)
Khalaf, F.M. 2005 (1)
Kim, D.H. 1999,2014 (2)
Kim, C. 2014 (2)
Kingsley, G.R. 1994-1996 (3)
Kishen, J.M.C. 1998 (1)
Kita, A. 2020 (1)
de Kleine, M.P.E. 2018 (1)
Kloosterman, F.H. 2017 (1)

313
Knox, C. 2010 (1)
Kok, M. 2015 (1)
Kolbitsch, A. 2014 (1)
Kong, J. 2016 (1)
Kooi, H. 2021 (1)
Korff, M. 2009-2021 (5)
Korswagen, P. 2019 (1)
Kostense, N. 2016 (1)
Kowalewski, Ł. 2015 (1)
Kowalsky, M.J. 2004 (1)
Košćak, J. 2018 (1)
Kraaijpoel, D. 2012,2013 (2)
Krajewski, P. 2014 (1)
Kralj, B. 1990 (1)
Krijgsman, H. 2016 (1)
Kruiver, P.P. 2015-2022 (9)
Kruse, H.M.G. 2013 (1)
Kržan, M. 2015 (1)
Kumar, S.L. 2019 (1)
Kusters, G.M.A. 1985 (1)
Kučera, J. 2016 (1)
Kwiecien, A. 2014 (1)
Kästli, P. 2015 (1)
Kürkschübasche, A.G. 1994 (1)
LaFave, J.M. 2010 (1)
Lacidogna, G. 2020 (1)
Lagomarsino, S. 2008-2024 (3)
Lallemant, D. 2022 (1)
Lam, N. 2002-2007 (4)
Landolfo, L. 2018 (1)
Landtwing, D. 2015 (1)
Landwehr, J.C. 2021 (1)
de Lange, G. 2013-2020 (6)
Langroudi, J.R. 2011 (1)
Larby, J.A. 2004 (1)
Laucelli, D. 2014 (1)
Laurin, F. 2012 (1)
Lava, P. 2015 (1)
Lawrence, S.J. 2000-2005 (4)
Lee, J.S. 1999,2014 (2)
Leite, J. 2011 (1)
Leiva, G.H. 1991 (1)
Lendering, K.T. 2015 (1)
Leon, R.T. 2006 (3)
Lestuzzi, P. 2005-2016 (4)
Levelt, O. 2021 (1)
Li, K. 2017 (1)
Li, W. 2012 (1)
Li, S. 2016 (1)
Li, X. 2024 (1)
Licciardello, L. 2020 (1)

Likas, A. 2003 (1)
Longo, M. 2023 (1)
Lopez, M.M. 2014 (1)
Lourenco, P. 2011 (1)
Lourenço, P.B. 1995-2020 (13)
Lubelli, B. 2004 (1)
Lucas, W. 2018 (1)
Lumantarna, R. 2010 (1)
Lumantarna, E. 2007 (1)
Lyons, J. 2016 (1)
Lévêque, D. 2012 (1)
MBIE, 2006 (1)
Macorini, L. 2016 (1)
Magenes, G. 1992-2018 (28)
Magonette, G. 1995 (1)
Maheri, M.R. 2012 (1)
Mair, R.J. 2003-2017 (4)
Maire, J.F. 2012 (1)
Maiwald, H. 2012 (1)
Malamud, B.D. 2014 (1)
Malena, M. 2016 (1)
Malomo, D. 2018 (1)
Mandirola, M. 2015-2017 (4)
Mandooh-Galal, K.E. 2004 (1)
Manfredi, G. 2009 (1)
Manie, J. 2016 (1)
Mantegazza, G. 2019 (1)
Marano, G.C. 2014 (1)
Marasli, M. 2023 (1)
Marchesi, B. 2016,2018 (2)
Marciukaitis, G. 2009 (1)
Mariani, V. 2016-2017 (3)
Marini, A. 2012,2013 (2)
Marques, A.I. 2017 (2)
Marshall, R. 2000 (1)
Marshall, J. 2012 (1)
Martinez, F. 2013 (1)
MartinezPereira, A. 1998 (1)
Martí, J. 2013 (1)
Mas, E. 2013 (1)
Masciotta, M.G. 2020 (1)
Masia, M.J. 2004-2015 (5)
Mason, M.S. 2019 (1)
Massarsch, K.R. 2002 (1)
Mata-Falcón, J. 2020 (1)
Matta, F. 2015 (1)
Matteis, G.D. 2014 (1)
di Matteo, A. 2018 (1)
Maurer, B.W. 2019,2020 (2)
Mavel, A. 2012 (1)
Mazzorana, B. 2014 (1)

Bibliography

References

314
Mazzotti, C. 2018 (2)
McBean, P.C. 2004 (1)
McCann, P. 2018 (1)
McGarr, A.F. 2016 (1)
van Meerten, J.J. 2021 (1)
Meijers, P. 2013-2016 (4)
Meillyta, 2012 (1)
Meincke, S. 2005 (1)
Melis, G. 2002,2003 (2)
Mellia, E. 2016 (1)
Mello, V.F.B.D. 1977 (1)
Melville, B.W. 2016 (1)
Mena, B. 2015 (1)
Mendes, N. 2010 (1)
Mergos, P. 2014-2015 (3)
Messali, F. 2016-2024 (16)
Meyer, U. 2019 (1)
Miao, Q. 2012 (1)
Michel, C. 2010 (1)
Middleton, J. 1990 (1)
Mignan, A. 2015 (1)
Milani, G. 2013,2014 (2)
Miller, S.C. 2013 (1)
Milosevic, J. 2018 (1)
Miraglia, S. 2015 (1)
de Miranda, S. 2017 (2)
Mitrovic, S. 2010 (1)
Modena, C. 2010,2013 (2)
Moghadam, A.S. 2011 (1)
Mohammed, B.S. 2009 (1)
Mojsilovic, N. 2019 (1)
Mojsilović, N. 2016,2017 (2)
Molina, F.J. 2008,2010 (2)
Molyneaux, T. 2002,2007 (2)
Monaco, P. 2012,2014 (2)
Monteiro, S.N. 1999 (1)
Moon, L. 2011 (1)
Moon, F.L. 2004-2006 (4)
Morandi, P. 2008-2018 (4)
Moreira, P. 2015 (1)
Moreira, S. 2012 (1)
Moroni, O. 2012 (1)
Mors, R.M. 2013 (1)
Mosalam, K. 2009 (1)
Mosallam, A.S. 2007 (1)
Mosayk, 2015 (1)
Moujahid, A. 2014 (1)
Moustafa, A. 2013 (1)
Mueffelman, J.G. 2013 (1)
Mufti, A. 2010 (1)
Muir, C.A. 2017 (1)

Bibliography
Mulder, M. 2018 (1)
Munari, M. 2013 (1)
Muntendam-Bos, A.G. 2015 (1)
Musson, R.M.W. 1998 (1)
Muthike, D.M. 2016 (1)
Mylonakis, G. 2006 (1)
NZGS, 2006 (1)
NZSEE, 2006 (1)
Najafgholipour, M.A. 2012 (1)
Nakamura, Y. 2018 (1)
Nam, 2015-2018 (3)
Narassiguin, A. 2016 (1)
Nascimbene, R. 2013 (1)
Nastev, M. 2013 (1)
Nateghi, F. 2008 (1)
Van Natijne, A. 2018 (1)
Nauta, P. 1985 (1)
Negulescu, C. 2014 (1)
Nehdi, M.L. 2020 (1)
NEHRP, 2012 (1)
Nen, 2005-2018 (3)
Nepveu, M. 2016 (1)
Netti, A. 2012 (1)
Netzel, H. 2004 (1)
Nghiem, H.L. 2013 (1)
Nguyen, M. 2022 (1)
Nikolaou, S. 2006 (1)
Nollet, M. 2013 (1)
Noorlandt, R. 2018 (1)
Noortman, F.J. 2019 (1)
Ntinalexis, M. 2015-2022 (8)
Nuñez, P. 2012 (1)
Oates, S.J. 2015-2020 (6)
Okada, S. 2000 (1)
Okada, T. 2019 (1)
Oktiovan, Y.P. 2023 (1)
Oliveira, C.S. 2012 (1)
Oliveira, D.V. 2012 (1)
Oliveira, J.T. 2003 (1)
Olivito, R.S. 2001 (1)
Oller, S. 2014 (1)
Omidi, P. 2020 (1)
van Onselen, E.P. 2022 (1)
Orton, S.L. 2005 (1)
Oses, N. 2014 (1)
Osterberg, G. 1935 (1)
O’Brien, J. 2019 (1)
Page, A.W. 1995-2019 (6)
Palmisano, F. 2016 (1)
Palomo-Velez, G. 2023 (1)
Pan, Z. 2017 (1)

Pande, G.N. 1990 (1)
Paparo, A. 2014 (1)
Papayianni, I. 2004 (1)
Pari, M. 2017-2018 (3)
Park, T. 2016 (1)
Parra, C. 2018 (1)
Parys, L.V. 2012 (1)
Paré, M.D. 2010 (1)
Pavese, A. 2004 (1)
Pavía, S. 2010 (1)
Pedersen, W. 2016 (1)
Pefkos, M. 2022 (1)
Peloso, S. 2013,2016 (2)
Pelà, L. 2014,2018 (2)
Penna, A. 2008-2018 (20)
Penning-Rowsell, E. 2008 (1)
Pereira, E.B. 2008 (1)
Perey, P. 2018 (1)
Perlaviciute, G. 2018,2023 (2)
Petersen, R.B. 2009 (1)
Petrović, M. 2017 (1)
Petry, S. 2013-2015 (3)
Pezzoli, P. 1998 (1)
Phillips, E. 2019 (1)
Li Piani, T. 2018 (1)
Picchi, L. 2003 (1)
Pickering, M. 2015 (1)
Pigorini, A. 2014 (1)
Pina-Henriques, J. 2004 (1)
Pinho, R. 2004-2022 (13)
Pinto, P.E. 2009 (1)
Pitilakis, D. 2006 (1)
Planas, J. 2008 (1)
Plant, N.G. 2015 (1)
Platzeck, G. 2016 (1)
Player, C.J. 2007 (1)
Pleijter, G. 2015 (1)
Van Der Pluijm, R. 1994-2019
(6)
Polidoro, B. 2015-2017 (3)
Pomonis, A. 1999 (1)
Popal, R. 2013 (1)
Porco, F. 2012 (1)
Portioli, F. 2015-2018 (5)
Porto, F.d. 2013-2016 (3)
da Porto, F. 2010 (1)
Potts, D.M. 1997 (1)
Prasad, P. 2019 (1)
Price, A.D. 2013 (1)
Priestley, M.J.N. 1994 (1)
de Proft, K. 2012 (1)

Proy, C. 2016 (1)
Salamone, S. 2013 (1)
Puente, I. 2018 (1)
van der Salm, R. 2012 (1)
Qian, C. 2015 (1)
Salmanpour, A.H. 2015-2017 (3)
Quintela, C. 2012 (1)
Saloustros, S. 2018 (1)
Quitoriano, V. 1999 (1)
San-Bartolomé, A. 2009 (1)
Raaijmakers, B.H.J. 1994 (1)
Sanches H., 2016 (1)
Rabinovitch, O. 2010 (1)
Sanches I., 2016 (1)
Radaelli, E.O. 2019 (1)
Sancho, J.M. 2008 (1)
Radtke, F. 2005 (1)
Sanderson, J. 2014 (1)
Rai, D.C. 2007 (1)
Sandoval, C. 2016 (1)
Rajeev, P. 2009 (1)
De Santis, S. 2018,2019 (2)
Ramadan, A.S. 2020 (1)
Saouma, V.E. 1998 (1)
Ramos, T. 2015 (1)
Sarhosis, V. 2014-2021 (3)
Ramos, L.F. 2012 (1)
Satti, K.M.H. 1972 (1)
Ranjbar, M.M. 2011 (1)
Sauerland, U. 2022 (1)
Rapone, D. 2020 (1)
Schauer, M. 2019 (1)
Rauci, M. 2010 (1)
Scherer, C. 2014 (1)
Ravenshorst, G.J.P. 2017-2019 Scherer, G.W. 2006 (1)
(5)
Schermer, D. 2008 (1)
Reddish, D.J. 1987 (1)
Scheufler, W. 2008 (1)
Reinhardt, H.W. 1986 (1)
Schipper, H.R. 2017-2019 (3)
Ren, G. 1987 (1)
Schipper, R. 2018 (1)
Reneckis, D. 2010 (1)
Schlangen, E. 2017 (1)
Schneemayer, A. 2014 (1)
Restrepo-Vélez, L.F. 2006 (1)
Schneiderhan, T. 2016 (1)
Reyes, E. 2008 (1)
Scholten, N.P.M. 2015 (1)
Ricci, P. 2017 (1)
Scholtens, B. 2018 (1)
Rinaldi, A.P. 2014 (1)
Schranz, C. 2014 (1)
Ringers, R. 2016 (1)
Schreppers, G.M.A. 2016 (1)
De Risi, M.T. 2017 (1)
Schultz, A. 2011,2013 (2)
Ritter, S. 2017-2020 (3)
Schwartz, N.M.J. 2015 (1)
Rizzardini, F. 2012 (1)
Schwarz, J. 1998,2012 (2)
Robertson, P.K. 1998 (1)
Sciotti, A. 2014 (1)
Roca, P. 2014,2018 (2)
Rodriguez-Marek, A. 2015-2022 Scott, M. 2014 (1)
Seible, F. 1994 (1)
(7)
Senaldi, I. 2011 (1)
Rodriguez-Marek, A. 2019 (1)
Seracino, R. 2010 (1)
Roest, J.P.A. 2015 (1)
Seyedi, D.M. 2013,2014 (2)
Roijakkers, R. 2016 (1)
Shafaei, J. 2014,2015 (2)
Romao, X. 2008 (1)
Romero Navarrete, J.A. 2008 (1) Shafiei, S. 2016 (1)
Shamseldin, A.Y. 2016 (1)
Romijn, R. 2017 (2)
Sharafati, A. 2021 (1)
de Roo, 1991 (1)
Sharma, S. 2018,2023 (2)
Roscini, F. 2018,2019 (2)
Shaw, 2008 (1)
Roselli, I. 2016 (1)
Sheng, Y. 2014 (1)
Rossi, A. 2015-2016 (3)
Shih, M. 2008 (1)
Rota, M. 2010 (1)
Shrive, N. 2010 (1)
Rots, J.G. 1985-2023 (51)
Sierra-Beltran, M.G. 2012 (1)
Ruigrok, E. 2018,2022 (2)
Sijacic, D. 2016 (1)
Rutqvist, J. 2014 (1)
Simone, A. 2012 (1)
SBR, 2010,2017 (2)
Simoni, S. 2014 (1)
SESOC, 2006 (1)

315
Simpson, B. 1996 (1)
Simundic, G. 2019 (1)
Singh, M.M. 1999 (1)
Siskind, D.E. 1984 (1)
Skroumpelou, G. 2018 (1)
Sloan, S.W. 2012 (1)
Slobbe, A.T. 2013 (1)
Sluys, B. 2012 (1)
Smits, M.T.J.H. 1993 (1)
Smrkić, M.F. 2018 (1)
Smyrou, E. 2011-2021 (4)
Snethlage, A.J. 2012 (1)
Son, M. 2005,2007 (2)
Son, H. 2014 (1)
Sorour, M. 2010 (1)
Sorrentino, L. 2017 (1)
Sousa-Oliveira, C. 2012 (1)
Sousamli, M. 2024 (1)
Soysal, B.F. 2023 (1)
Spacone, E. 2020 (1)
Spence, R. 1999,2004 (2)
Spetzler, J. 2017,2022 (2)
Spyrakos, C.C. 2003 (1)
Van Staalduinen, P.C.
1993-2018 (4)
Stafford, P.J. 2015-2020 (11)
Stafleu, J. 2017 (2)
Stagg, M.S. 1984 (1)
Standing, J.R. 2001 (1)
Stead, M. 2015 (1)
Steenbergen, R.D.J.M.
2015-2017 (4)
Steg, L. 2023 (1)
Stevens, M.G. 1984 (1)
Stojadinovic, B. 2018 (1)
Stojadinović, B. 2017 (1)
Storck, T. 2020 (1)
Stoutjesdijk, T.P. 2013 (1)
van Straalen, I. 2017 (1)
Straman, 1991 (1)
Stryszewska, T. 2019 (1)
Stucchi, M. 1998 (1)
Stumpo, P. 2001 (1)
Stuurman, R.J. 2021 (1)
Suckale, J. 2017 (1)
Sucuoglu, H. 2013 (1)
Suhairy, S.A. 2000 (1)
Sullivan, T.J. 2004,2013 (2)
Sung, W. 2008 (1)
Suppasri, A. 2013 (1)
Sutton, M.A. 2015 (1)

Bibliography

References

316
Svinkin, M.R. 1999,2013 (2)
Sweeney, S.C. 2005 (1)
TUDelft, 2015 (1)
Takai, N. 2000 (1)
Tang, C.A. 2012 (1)
Tanner, J. 2012 (1)
Tarbotton, C. 2015 (1)
Tasiopoulou, P. 2011-2019 (3)
Tavares, P. 2015 (1)
Tedesco, F. 2016 (1)
Teigen, J.G. 1998 (1)
Tena-Colunga, A. 2015 (1)
Ter-Horst, W.L.A. 2015 (1)
Terwel, K. 2017,2018 (2)
Thamboo, J.A. 2013,2015 (2)
Theodossopoulos, D. 2014 (1)
van Thienen-Visser, K.
2015,2016 (2)
Thijssen, C.C.F. 1999 (1)
Thürlimann, B. 1984 (1)
Tianyi, Y. 2006 (1)
Tin-Loi, F. 2001 (1)
Tomasi, R. 2014,2019 (2)
Tomassetti, U. 2015-2018 (14)
Tomazevic, M. 2007,2014 (2)
Tomor, A. 2020 (1)
Tondelli, M. 2013 (1)
Toumbakari, E. 2004 (1)
Tralli, A. 2017 (2)
Trifunac, M.D. 1971 (1)
Trovato, D. 2011 (1)
Tschegg, E.K. 2014 (1)
Tung, D.P. 2017 (1)
Tung, S. 2008 (1)
Turcoa, E. 2016 (1)
Turner, F. 2012 (1)
Tziviloglou, E. 2017 (1)
Ubertini, F. 2019,2020 (2)
Uilenreef, J. 2017,2018 (2)
Ulrich, T. 2014 (1)
Uva, G. 2012 (1)
Vaculik, J. 2007-2017 (6)
Valdebenito, G. 2016 (1)
Valente, S. 2011 (1)
Valivonis, J. 2009 (1)
Valluzzi, M.R. 2013 (1)
Vanclay, F. 2014 (1)
Vandoren, B. 2012 (1)
Vecchio, F.J. 1986 (1)
de Vent, I. 2011 (2)
Ventura, C. 2011 (1)

Bibliography
Verbeek, J.J. 2003 (1)
Verderame, G.M. 2017 (1)
Vermaas, T. 2013 (1)
Vermeltfoort, A.T. 1994-2005 (3)
Van Verseveld, H.C.W. 2015 (1)
Verstrynge, E. 2016,2020 (2)
Verweij, A. 2016 (1)
Visintin, P. 2018 (1)
Visschedijk, M.A.T. 2013 (1)
Vitone, C. 2016 (1)
Vlachakis, G. 2017 (1)
Vlassis, N. 2003 (1)
Vlek, C. 2018 (1)
van der Vliet, C. 2016 (1)
Van Vliet, M.R.A. 2004 (1)
Voet, E. 2016 (1)
Voigt, S. 2016 (1)
Vonk, R. 2016 (1)
van der Voort, N. 2014 (1)
Vrijling, J.K. 2003 (1)
Vrouwenvelder, A.C.W.M.
2015,2017 (2)
Vásconez Gutiérrez, P.A. 2016
(1)
de Waal, J.A. 2015 (1)
Waarts, P. 1997 (1)
Wald, D.J. 1999 (1)
Walraven, 1990 (1)
Walsh, K.Q. 2014-2018 (7)
Wang, S.Y. 2012 (1)
Wang, X. 2016 (1)
Wang, T. 2012 (1)
Wassing, B.B.T. 2012 (1)
Weber, F. 2010 (1)
White, M. 1999 (1)
Whittaker, A.S. 2013,2015 (2)
Whittaker, B.N. 1987 (1)
Wiemer, S. 2015 (1)
Wiersma, A. 2017 (1)
Wijanto, L.S. 2007 (1)
Van Wijnbergen, E. 2015 (1)
De Wilder, K. 2016 (1)
Willis, C.R. 2004-2010 (4)
Wilson, J. 2002-2008 (5)
Wilson, A. 2011-2014 (3)
Winant, T. 2015 (1)
de Wit, S. 2019 (1)
Wojciechowska, K. 2015 (1)
Wong, L.S. 2020 (1)
Wride, C.E. 1998 (1)
Wroth, C.P. 1974 (1)

Xu, S. 2009 (1)
Xu, C. 2003 (1)
Xu, L. 2022 (1)
Yakut, A. 2015 (1)
Yan, C. 2013 (1)
Yang, T.Y. 2017 (1)
Yi, Y. 2017 (1)
Yi, T. 2004-2006 (3)
Younis, A. 2020 (1)
Zahra, T. 2019 (1)
Zapico, B. 2010 (1)
Zarnić, R. 2008 (1)
Zethof, M. 2015 (1)
Zhai, C. 2016 (1)
Zhang, S. 2019 (1)
Zhu, Y. 2006,2009 (2)
Zhuge, Y. 2004 (1)
van Zijl, G.P.A.G. 2001 (1)
Zilch, E.h.K. 2008 (1)
Zuccaro, G. 2010 (1)
Zucchini, A. 2006 (1)
Zuideveld-Venema, N. 2019 (1)
Zurek, B. 2019 (2)
daPorto, F. 2016 (2)
deFelice, G. 2016 (1)
deMartin, B. 2019 (1)
Červenka, J. 1998 (1)
Šipoš, T.K. 2020 (1)

This image shows local principal strains, normalised on a
logarithmic scale. In this way, faint cracks are also visible.
The high resolution of the DIC implementation shows
cracks through the mortar joints, switching between its
interfaces with the bricks.
Invisible cracks, phantoms parallel to the more
prominent body cracks, can also be identified.
Can you find the broken bricks, split by a crack?

Appendices
Appendix A
Overview of Related Work.........................................................................i
Appendix B
Ψ Damage Parameter ..........................................................................xxix
Appendix C
Supervised MSc Projects .....................................................................xxxv
Appendix D
Glossary ..............................................................................................xxxix
Appendix E
Loppersum Visit ....................................................................................xliii
Appendix F
Dataset ..................................................................................................xlix
Appendix G
Tool for Crack Tracking .............................................................................li
Curriculum Vitæ....................................................................................lxvii
Propositions ..........................................................................................lxix
Acknowledgements ..............................................................................lxxi

Appendices

Extended Table of Contents................................................................lxxvi

Appendix A
Overview of Related Work
During the time in which this work was conceived, several related, and
sometimes less-related, projects and activities were undertaken.
This appendix summarises the various topics into up to four pages for each
section. These summaries serve as quick references from the main text and link
to other works where the topics are further elaborated. Wherever possible,
every section provides references to further reading.
A.1. Laboratory High-Resolution Monitoring with DIC ......................................................ii
A.2. Geometry Statistics from 3D·BAG .............................................................................iv
A.3. Experiments and Models of NeHoBo Floors ............................................................vii
A.4. SLaMA-based, parametric computational models for pushover ADRS analyses of
masonry typologies ...........................................................................................................ix
A.5. Strengthening: Structural Glass.................................................................................xii
A.6. Repair: Self-Healing Mortar ......................................................................................xiii
A.7. Out-of-Plane of Masonry Walls during Hydrostatic Loading ....................................xiv
A.8. The Action of Debris during the German Flood of 2021 .........................................xvi
A.9. Strategy for Safety Assessment of Historical Quay Walls .......................................xviii
A.10. Experiments during course ‘Masonry Bend & Break’ .............................................xxi
A.11. Analysis of Waarts’ Probabilistic Estimation of Damage .......................................xxii
A.12. InSAR Analysis of Cyclic Soil Movements in Norg ................................................xxiii

A.15. The Effect of Truck Vibrations in Comparison to Earthquakes’............................xxvii

Appendices

A.14. The Effect of Combined Horizontal Strain and Curvature on Masonry Façades from
Soil Movements ..............................................................................................................xxv

A

A.13. The Effect of Deep Subsidence on Masonry Façades ..........................................xxiv

ii

Appendix A

A.1. Laboratory High-Resolution Monitoring with DIC
Processing images with Digital Image Correlation to measure displacements is
a photogrammetry technique that was developed almost along side digital
cameras. However, increased computational processing capacity, storage
capabilities, and camera resolutions have shaped DIC into a versatile and
popular tool in recent years. Yet, DIC was, so far, focused on measuring strains
over small surfaces. For this study, discrete cracks over large surfaces needed
to be captured.
For this purpose, a considerable amount of work was conducted to develop a
DIC system capable of accurately tracking invisible cracks on a masonry wall.
For the large surface of a full-scale masonry wall, instead of using several
cameras, typically associated with issues when composing the images or
processed results together, a single camera with 51 Mpx was employed. This
yielded a theoretical resolution of 20µm. To achieve this, however, the surface
of the masonry had to produce an optimal pattern suited for the apparent pixel
size of the camera. Given the distance of the camera to capture the full wall,
the surface of the masonry was too fine and a marker per brick, as used in
previous tests, was too coarse. Similarly, spraying the masonry with a speckle
pattern could not guarantee the required resolution over the entire wall.
Consequently, a flexible acrylic stencil was designed and laser-cut to produce a
speckle pattern that would be optional for the camera settings.
On the processing side, the software (commercially) available in 2017 was not
optimised for detecting discrete cracks. Therefore, a solution was developed
which could detect discrete discontinuities in the displacement field, recognise
the concept of individual cracks, and track their progress, in width and length,
over an entire experiment. This software solution, coded in Matlab and
deployed as a stand-alone program, was optimised to run in multiple
processors and allowed processing
images, with about one million
measuring points each, in about one
minute per image. Moreover, the
process is largely automatised and
specific for the types of masonry walls
studied in the laboratory.
Figure A.1a A portion of a shear masonry wall
of fired-clay brick showing zigzag diagonal
and vertical cracking smeared around the
centre of the wall just before it consolidates
into a single crack.

Appendices

iii

a

b

c

d

e

f

Figure A.1.2. Normalised principal strain plots of a section of a shear-triplet test sample
(h) towards the end of the test starting at the last zero position (a), followed by the last
peak displacement (b) and throughout the monotonic phase until total failure (g). Notice
how initially incipient strains are localised at the top of the four potential failure planes.
Then, the strains grow towards the bottom and also start to reach up from the bottom (c
and d). In the case of the right mortar joint, the potential cracks grow from the top at
the face of the middle brick and from the bottom at the face of the right brick (e). This
results in the crack that crosses the mortar joint diagonally (f).

See [24], sections J and H.

A

h

Appendices

g

iv

Appendix A

A.2. Geometry Statistics from 3D·BAG
The 3D BAG project is an adaptation of the Netherlands' Basisregistraties
Adressen en Gebouwen (BAG), enhanced by the 3D geoinformation research
group at Delft University of Technology to include building height information.
This project transforms the BAG dataset, incorporating aerial laser
measurements to provide detailed geometries and is freely accessible for
public use.
The comprehensive database has been meticulously post-processed, yielding
statistics on various architectural features such as wall shapes and roof types
from about 10 million buildings dating from 1770 to 2022, covering
approximately 45GB of data. A significant portion of the analysis focuses on
examining building façades by "unfolding" the 3D geometries to better
understand wall dimensions and configurations across different construction
periods. This effort has unearthed patterns in wall length and height,
identifying common dimensions that correlate with typical Dutch architectural
styles and construction practices. Further analysis delves into the distribution of
these dimensions across the nation, with special attention to areas surrounding
the Groningen gasfield and regions defined by PGA contours related to
seismic activity risks.

Figure A.2.1. 3D view of the faculty of Civil Engineering and Geosciences on the
campus of the TU Delft projected onto an aerial view of the ground. From the website
of 3dbag.nl [3].

Appendices

v

The study categorises wall shapes into several typologies, including flat, gable,
single-sloped, and variant gables, among others, based on the geometric data
derived from the unfolding algorithm. This classification aids in identifying
prevalent architectural features and assessing potential vulnerabilities,
especially in areas prone to earthquakes.
Despite the valuable insights provided, the report acknowledges limitations
due to uncertainties in data accuracy, measurement interpretations, and postprocessing methodologies. The reliance on aerial measurements and database
records, both subject to errors and inconsistencies, introduces potential for
inaccuracies in the final geometric representations and the derived statistics.
In conclusion, the "3D BAG" project offers a groundbreaking perspective on
the Netherlands' built environment, presenting a rich dataset for architectural,
urban planning, and seismic vulnerability analyses. While acknowledging the
challenges and uncertainties inherent in such a comprehensive dataset, the
project illustrates the potential of integrating aerial measurements with
traditional building registries to enhance our understanding of building
characteristics and vulnerabilities at a national scale.

4

2

Height in m

Height in m

3

1

0

0

2

4

6

8

Length in m

10

12

14

5

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Length in m

Appendices

A

Figure A.2.2. Two examples of the unfolded geometry of two buildings showing the
individual walls’ length and height.

Appendix A
0.2

0.4

0.15

0.35

0.1

0.3

0.05

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

Length of wall in m

Probability Density

0.6

Probability Density

Probability Density

vi

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

0.5
0.05
0.4
0

0.3

0

2

6

8

Data
LogNormal
Kernel Non-Parametric

0.1
0

4

Height of wall in m

0.2

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Length/Height Ratio

Figure A.2.3. Distribution fit to length and height properties.

References
• https://docs.3dbag.nl/en/
• https://tudelft3d.github.io/bag3d/intro.html
• https://3dbag.nl/en/viewer

10

12

Appendices

vii

A.3. Experiments and Models of NeHoBo Floors
NeHoBo floors were pre-fabricated masonry floor panels used in the
Netherlands in the 50s-70s. Unlike modern concrete floors where masonry units
are employed as lost formwork to make the floor lighter, NeHoBo floors were
actual masonry wallets that would be constructed vertically as a regular wall
and then placed horizontally to form a floor. In the bed joints, steel rebar would
be embedded in between masonry units of a special shape. In most cases, the
floors would be finished with a top concrete layer.

Appendices

The goal of this project, officiated by NAM, was to determine whether NHB
floors could provide sufficient diaphragm action between masonry walls during
lateral loading of a structure. To answer this question two aspects needed to be
understood. First, what were the relevant mechanical properties for the
behaviour of this floor and to characterise these experimentally - floor samples
from existing structures were available. Secondly, whether the actual strength
from the floors was sufficient for a typical masonry structure. The study was thus
a mix of experimental characterisation and (numerical) modelling.

A

Figure A.3a. Top: a crosscut of a NeHoBo floor panel in horizontal position, left; and its
3D model, right. The bed joints (with rebar) appear vertical in between units. The panel
is topped by a concrete layer. Bottom: deep beam action of a floor diaphragm (view
from the top). Left, the required material properties to determine the capacity of the
deep beam.

viii

Appendix A

In the first step, the diaphragm action from the floor in a masonry structure was
likened to a deep beam (Figure A.3.b) where a tensile strut and a compression
arch appear in the floor. For this tension strut, the tensile strength of the
masonry perpendicular to the joints had to be obtained. For the compressive
zone, shear parallel to the joints had to be evaluated. For the latter, a modified
triplet shear test was used, while for the former, a 3 or 4-point bending test,
where flexure leads to tensile stresses, was employed to determine the tensile
capacity of the joints.

Figure A.3.b. Top left, shear triplet specimen after failure. Top right, 4-point bending
test with flexural crack. Middle; reproduction with an Abaqus detailed model showing
failure at the mortar and mortar-unit interface. Bottom, comparison of a masonry
assemblage with concrete (left) or NeHoBo floors.

The characterisation experiments were reproduced with detailed finiteelement-method models and virtual tests were subsequently performed to
evaluate the behaviour of the floor panels in other situations such as out-of-

Appendices

ix

plane flexure in the parallel and perpendicular directions. Moreover, the
influence of the concrete layer could be quantified and subtracted to account
for the conservative situation when this layer was damaged or not present.
Finally, a quasi-static test of a masonry house, tested at the TU Delft, was
reproduced. Then, the original concrete floor plates were replaced with
NeHoBo floor panels in the models to assess their effect and observe if they
would behave non-linearly.
The study concluded that the strength of the NeHoBo floors was not negligible
and that it was sufficient to provide the diaphragm action associated with stiff
floors. See [25].

A.4. SLaMA-based, parametric computational models for
pushover ADRS analyses of masonry typologies
Analytical models were used to evaluate structures subjected to lateral loading,
as recommended by numerous codes and guidelines worldwide. A
programmatic approach to these analyses enabled a probabilistic and iterative
assessment of different typologies, structural parameters, connections, and
even strengthening interventions. This method also provided insights into
failure mechanisms, damage, and consequences. Unlike FE models, which are
hard to parametrise and expensive to run, programmatic analytical models
allowed for quick quantification of a typologies’ features or modifications.

Probabilistic analyses, where each model represented a sample from material,
geometric, and model parameter distributions, were coupled with the
probabilistic hazard. The demand for each location and sub-typology could be
directly defined, allowing for quick reassessment with changes in demand. The

Appendices

Clara's assessment included analysing the in-plane direction behaviour through
lateral pushover analysis, contrasted with the acceleration and displacement
demands from response spectra. Out-of-plane evaluations were conducted
independently for each component, yet linked to the in-plane behaviour,
highlighting the importance of true boundary conditions for accurate
predictions.

A

The program, dubbed CLaRA, was developed for analytically assessing
structures against seismic demands. It performs all the aforementioned tasks
but is initially limited to a set of sub-typologies. These include rigid concrete
floors, single-wythe calcium-silicate walls, and the absence of spandrels
between piers. Plans for future enhancements aim to cover most unreinforced
masonry typologies found in the province of Groningen by incorporating
features like timber or flexible floors, spandrels, and double-wythe walls.

x

Appendix A

program could evaluate 35,000 non-linear models per hour on a single desktop
computer, a capability beyond that of FEM modelling for complete non-linear
structures. The inclusion of a consequence model enabled outputting
individual risk per typology, with preliminary values around 6·10-6 for the
Curve for Direction 1
104 PushOver
105 PushOver Curve for Direction 2
implemented
sub-typologies.
8
3

Storey 2

Lateral F in N

The core
methodology involved a SLaMA-type approach for computing the
6
2
global
pushover curve for in-plane analysis, combining the behaviour of
4
individual walls and piers per storey through
an adaptive, mass-proportional
1
2
pushover analysis. Iterative evaluations against non-linear response spectra
0
0
determined the capacity/demand ratio, demonstrating the program's capability
-2
for detailed
failure rate assessments under-1 varying assumptions. In a sense,
Clara’s
-4 approach follows a simplified Sequentially Linear Analysis (SLA), where
-2
failure
-6 of individual components triggers a re-evaluation of the lateral stiffness
of the structure. In this manner, a pushover capacity curve could be generated
-8
-3
-0.03 -0.02
0
0.01
0.02 0.03 0.04where -0.03
-0.02 -0.01
0
0.01
0.02 0.03 0.04
including
the -0.01
possibility
of snap-back
the force
and drift
unload.
1.5

105 PushOver Curve for Direction 1

6

4

Lateral F in N

1

Storey 1

105 PushOver Curve for Direction 2

0.5

0

2

0

-2
-0.5

-1
-0.03

-4

-0.02

-0.01

0

Drift

0.01

0.02

0.03

-6
-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

Drift

Figure A.4.1. The pushover curve of an example building. Every point marks an event in
one of the structural components.

Appendices

xi
PushOver Curve for Direction 1 - OK

200

PushOver Curve for Direction 2 - OK

T+eq =0.22 s

1000

T+eq =0.024 s

T-eq =0.23 s

800

T-eq =0.026 s

600

Base Shear Force in kN

Base Shear Force in kN

150
100
50
0
-50
-100

400
200
0
-200
-400
-600

-150
C/D + =2.7

-200

-

C/D =2.2
-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

Top Floor Displacement in mm
Inelastic Demand for 45% damping
Inelastic Demand for 45% damping
Elastic Demand

60

-800

C/D + =4.5
C/D - =4.5

-1000
-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

Top Floor Displacement in mm
Inelastic Demand for 5% damping
Inelastic Demand for 5% damping
Elastic Demand

Figure A.4.2. Left, the intersection of a pushover curve and the ADRS. Damping is
iteratively calculated. Right, examples of the geometry of buildings following a
parametrisation via probabilistic distributions for the number, location, size, etc of the
structural components.

Appendices

A

Figure A.4.3. Modal
modes (and periods) for
the building. 3D modes
are also computed. The
modal behaviour can be
iteratively re-computed
based on yielding or
failure of structural
components.

xii

Appendix A

A.5. Strengthening: Structural Glass
Gaggero et al. [19] investigated using structural glass to strengthen or retrofit
masonry structures. Preliminary numerical studies were conducted by de Groot
(2019). The solution consisted of timber-framed laminated glass. In the
experimental campaign, the windows were tested separately first and then
inside the opening of a masonry wall.
The goal of the timber-glass design was to provide increased in-plane stiffness
during small values of drift. This would reduce light damage during vibrations
as the stiffer structure would develop smaller inter-storey drift. The glass was
attached to the timber frame with a thin, semi-flexible adhesive. At larger
values of drift, the adhesive would tear. The relative sliding between timber
and glass, together with crushing of the timber, lead to an extremely high
capacity for the release of hysteretic energy. Hence, for larger values of drift
associated with the near-collapse stage, the masonry structure would acquire
significant dampening capacity, which significantly decreases the spectral
demand. In this manner, the strengthening solution does not lead to increased
forces on the foundation or other structural elements, a typical ailing of many
strengthening methods. Hence, both light damage and near-collapse states are
addressed.

Figure A.5.1. Experimental masonry wall with window of timber-glass design. The glass
is painted for DIC purposes.

In subsequent iterations, improvements were made in the installation of the
window by injecting with grout the tolerance between masonry and timber
frame. Moreover, an anchoring system, that allowed pushing the frame from
the front of the wall, guaranteed that failure would never occur at the masonry-

Appendices

xiii

timber interface, but focus instead on the timber-adhesive-glass interface.
Because of the relatively soft timber in comparison to the laminated glass, the
glass panels never failed during any of the experiments.

A.6. Repair: Self-Healing Mortar
The project delves into the innovative application of a bacteria-based selfhealing mortar, initially designed for concrete structures, to masonry work. This
initiative is driven by the need to address the prevalent issue of cracks in
masonry, which not only diminish the visual appeal of buildings but also
undermine their structural integrity and weather/water resistance. The goals of
the project are twofold. First, it seeks to confirm whether the self-healing
mortar can effectively repair masonry structures, ensuring compatibility and
efficiency in real-world applications. This involved a comprehensive series of
experimental tests to assess the mortar's healing capabilities, including its
strength restoration and aesthetic recovery post-damage. Second, the project
aims to evaluate the feasibility of incorporating self-healing mortar into new
construction projects, offering a proactive approach to enhancing the durability
and resilience of masonry structures.
Several key advantages of using self-healing mortar in masonry have been
identified. One of the most significant benefits is the mortar's capacity for
automatic crack repair, which activates upon the occurrence of damage,
thereby reducing the need for manual repair work and potentially lowering
long-term maintenance costs. Additionally, the self-healing process is designed
to restore the masonry's original properties, including its structural strength and
aesthetic appearance, following damage. This contributes to the overall
durability of the structure, extending its lifespan and improving its resistance to
environmental factors.

Appendices

Gaggero et al. [21] performed initial tests as a proof-of-concept. These
demonstrated the effectiveness of the self-healing for cement-based mortar.
Additional tests, focused on historical masonry, explore the compatibility with
older bricks and lime-based mortars.

A

The project's experimental findings highlight the mortar's effectiveness across
various types of bricks, including calcium-silicate and clay bricks, indicating its
versatility for different masonry applications. Moreover, the research
underscores the importance of tailoring the healing conditions—such as
humidity levels—to match the specific requirements of the masonry material,
ensuring optimal healing outcomes.

xiv

Appendix A

A.7. Out-of-Plane of Masonry Walls during Hydrostatic Loading
In a pragmatic experiment conducted at Flood Proof Holland, we sought to
determine the ability of fired-clay-brick masonry walls to withstand hydrostatic
water pressures and impacts from debris, providing experimental data for the
calibration of structural models. These models were intended for the
development of fragility models to evaluate economic and life loss from Dutch
flood scenarios.
The experiment involved constructing a 2.7x2.7 meter square wall, 100 mm
thick, on a steel rig designed to simulate real-world conditions as closely as
possible. The wall faced hydrostatic loads by subjecting it to a water level
difference of up to 125 cm on one side, while maintaining the opposite side at
0 cm, effectively mimicking conditions where the interior of a structure remains
dry during a flood. This setup aimed to assess the wall's structural integrity
under varying water pressures, particularly looking for the onset of cracking and
the overall deformation of the wall under stress.
The wall was restrained on all four sides to simulate the constraints buildings
typically place on such walls. This restraint was achieved through adhesion to
top and bottom steel beams and lateral steel columns of the rig. During the
tests, the most challenging scenarios involved different combinations of water
levels, resulting in minor cracking and an out-of-plane deformation of
approximately 2 mm when subjected to a hydrostatic pressure equivalent to 95
cm of water. This deformation reflected two-way bending behaviour due to the
horizontal supports preventing lateral movement. Further complexity was
added to the experiment by considering the vertical overburden imposed by
the steel rig, which simulated the gravitational loads buildings impose on their
walls. This addition aimed to provide a more accurate representation of realworld stresses.
Non-linear, finite element models, calibrated using the experimental data,
offered deeper insights into the wall's behaviour under varying conditions.
Initial observations showed linear-elastic behaviour up to a water level of
approximately 90 cm. Beyond this point, significant deformation and the
initiation of cracking were noted. The models attributed this to a redistribution
of bending stresses, moving from the vertical axis, where the wall is stiffer but
weaker, to the horizontal axis, which could better support the stress. At a water
level of 125 cm, the wall's deformation escalated to 5 mm, signalling a
progression towards failure, which was projected to occur around a depth of
150 cm, a threshold not experimentally tested but inferred from the data and
model predictions.

Appendices

xv

This detailed analysis concluded that traditional, single-wythe masonry walls
could safely withstand up to 90 cm of water depth when the interior remains
dry. However, it also revealed that such walls are considerably more vulnerable

Appendices

Figure A.7. Collage detailing the construction and context of the tested wall.

A

The research also incorporated the effect of debris impact in conjunction with
hydrostatic pressure. Simulating scenarios where the wall was hit by a floating
tree log and a suspended steel cube represented soft and hard debris,
respectively. Soft debris impacts up to 1.8 m/s (90 Joules) did not significantly
alter the wall's deformation. However, impacts from the steel cube, especially
in combination with water depth nearing 90 cm, caused noticeable out-ofplane deformations, diagonal cracking, water leakage through cracks, and
localised masonry failure.

xvi

Appendix A

without lateral support, emphasising the need for adequate structural
constraints in building designs to mitigate flood damage.
Future research directions were outlined to further explore the differences in
wall behaviour under one-way versus two-way bending conditions, the effects
of water leakage through openings, and the performance of cavity walls
common in Dutch construction. These studies aim to enhance the
understanding of flood resilience in buildings, contributing to more effective
flood prevention and mitigation strategies. See [5] and {C.13}.

A.8. The Action of Debris during the German Flood of 2021
The July 2021 flood in Germany, particularly in the Ahr Valley, exemplifies the
destructive potential of extreme weather events exacerbated by climate
change. This disaster not only claimed lives and inflicted injuries but also
caused significant damage to buildings, critical infrastructure, and the
environment, highlighting the urgent need for comprehensive flood risk
management and resilient infrastructure design. Conducted by a team of
hydraulic and structural engineers, including the author, a field survey in the
aftermath of the flood sought to understand the mechanisms behind the
widespread structural failures. In hindsight, one of the critical aspects of this
survey was to assess the impact of floating and water-borne debris on buildings
and infrastructure. Debris, consisting of natural materials like wood and manmade objects, played a significant role in exacerbating the damage by
colliding with structures and forming "debris dams" that increased the
hydrostatic pressure on buildings. This summary focuses on the actions of
debris during the flood, revealing the challenges in managing such dynamic
and destructive forces and the importance of incorporating debris impact
considerations into flood protection and infrastructure design strategies.
The floating and water-borne debris consisted mainly of tree trunks, branches,
construction materials, and household items. It inflicted damage in two main
ways: by colliding with structures due to the momentum of the floodwaters and
by gathering around buildings to form "debris dams." These dams increased
hydrostatic pressures on structures, reduced flow areas around buildings, and,
in many cases, led to structural failures due to the additional load imposed by
the accumulation of debris.

Appendices

xvii

Figure A.8.1. Left, marks induced on buildings by debris impact, and right, debris
damming around building openings.

Figure A.8.2. Example of a façade where the flow of water and floating/trapped debris
removed windows and knocked out a pier.

Appendices

A

Debris impacts were noted to occur mostly at the corners of buildings or
around openings, suggesting that the collisions were partly responsible for
structural failures. Debris dams formed upstream of buildings, blocking
openings and contributing to backwater effects, which magnified the flood's
impact by increasing the depth and extent of water around the buildings. The
debris also posed a significant challenge by filling up space inside buildings,
reducing the capacity for floodwaters to flow through, thereby increasing the
pressure on the buildings' walls and foundations.

xviii

Appendix A

The survey conducted in the aftermath of the flood provided evidence of the
damage caused by debris, including marks and structural failures induced by
debris impact. The type of debris varied widely but was primarily composed of
natural materials like wood, as well as man-made objects and materials
dislodged from buildings and infrastructure. This wide variety of debris types
contributed to the complex nature of the damage and highlighted the
importance of considering debris management in flood risk analysis and
mitigation strategies.
In summary, the action of debris during the 2021 German flood significantly
contributed to the damage observed in the Ahr Valley. The findings underscore
the importance of incorporating the potential impact of debris into flood
protection measures and the design of flood-resistant buildings and
infrastructure.
See [26] and D. Wüthrich, P.A. Korswagen, H. Selvam, J. Oetjen, J. Bricker, H.
Schüttrumpf (2024). Field survey assessment of flood loads and related
building damage from the July 2021 event in the Ahr Valley (Germany). Journal
of Flood Risk Management.

A.9. Strategy for Safety Assessment of Historical Quay Walls
Dutch cities are known for their masonry infrastructure such as bridges and
quay-walls along the city canals. Many of the centenarian quay walls have been
insufficiently maintained or are unprepared for today’s (traffic) loads. A
comprehensive strategy was devised to assess the vulnerability of these
structures with a focus on the masonry aspect. The approach integrates three
main phases: Insight, Deepening, and Synthesis, across four distinct topic lines,
providing a holistic view of the project's progression from initial analysis to the
development of actionable guidelines. While only portions of the original
strategy are currently being addressed at the TU Delft, several advances have
been made in the characterisation of quay walls (Li et.al, 2023), and modelling
of quay walls (Sharma et.al, 2023) and wharf cellars (Oktiovan et.al, 2023). The
municipality of Amsterdam has investigated several of the topics, too.
A brief description of each topic line and phase is gathered next.
Characterisation of Masonry Material begins with the Insight phase, focusing
on gathering existing material data, conducting initial material tests, and
developing small scale brick-to-brick models. These steps establish a
foundational understanding of masonry materials observed in aged multiwythed masonry, documented in successive versions of a Material's Abacus.
The Deepening phase continues with additional material tests and

Appendices

xix

investigations into non-destructive tests, size, shape, boundary effects, and
tests on deterioration and connections, aiming to refine and expand the
material's database. Finally, in the Synthesis phase, further material testing
solidifies the data, offering a comprehensive characterisation of masonry
materials for use in subsequent analyses and model developments.
Computational Modelling & Structural Analysis transitions from the creation
of integral models, which encompass structures and their surroundings, to
zoomed-in models of masonry structures and analytical models in its initial
phase. These efforts produce a first version of the modelling report. As the
project deepens, improvements to material models for multi-wythe masonry
are made, alongside the development of models to replicate damage patterns
and parametric structural models, leading to a second modelling report. The
Synthesis phase validates these models and simplifies them for practical
application, generating a final modelling report. This progression encapsulates
the project's evolving understanding and simulation capabilities regarding
masonry structure behaviours and their analysis.

Across these four topics, the proposal’s phased approach—beginning with
foundational insights, moving through detailed analysis and model
development, and culminating in actionable frameworks and validation tests—

Appendices

Inventory Masonry Structures and Validation Tests commence with a review
of existing data and the definition of typologies, progressing through novel
techniques for data acquisition and the preparation of large-scale laboratory
and in-situ testing. The overview report summarises these initial findings and
methodologies. The phase continues with the execution of these tests, which
serve to validate the project's earlier findings and hypotheses. This line
culminates in a preliminary investigation into strengthening techniques, aiming
to enhance the resilience and durability of masonry structures based on the
insights gained throughout the project. The focus on typologies and the
incorporation of both laboratory and real-world testing ensure a robust and
applicable framework for future masonry structure analysis and reinforcement.

A

Framework for Causality/Attributability is primarily developed in the
Synthesis phase. It involves consolidating the project's findings into a
comprehensive report that addresses failure, fragility, and reliability. This
framework supports the creation of guidelines for diagnosis and assessment,
aiming to provide a systematic approach to understanding and addressing the
vulnerabilities and failure mechanisms in masonry structures. By establishing
clear connections between causes and observed conditions, the project lays
the groundwork for effective structural assessment and the development of
targeted interventions.

xx

Appendix A

illustrates a comprehensive strategy for understanding, analysing, and
enhancing masonry city infrastructure. Each topic line contributes to the
project's overall goal of improving the assessment, maintenance, and
preservation of masonry constructions.

Figure 1. Old city-canal in Delft with masonry quay walls and a masonry overpassing
with abutments.

Appendices

xxi

A.10. Experiments during course ‘Masonry Bend & Break’
The masonry course, part of the BSc minor “Bend and Break”, has two parts:
theory and practice. In the practical, the students begin by constructing small
samples: masonry couplets for bond-wrench tests, to look at the tensile
strength of the bond, and square towers, for a compressive test to determine
the strength of their masonry. Often, both fired-clay and calcium-silicate
masonry are compared and, sometimes, the effect of dry or wetted bricks is
investigated. These small tests give the students the practice and the insight to
design their larger experiment.

Figure A.10. Various experiments from the course, featuring a compressive test on
masonry, a wall tested out-of-plane, with vertical and horizontal cracking, and an arch.

Appendices

A

Indeed, during the rest of the practical, the students have a choice of building
a wall or an arch. For the latter, the students submit a plan and only the two
most feasible arches are selected - the entire class should be able to see
examples of walls and arches. The single-wythe wall has one-brick buttresses at
the edges which triggers a more interesting failure with two-way bending. A
point load is applied on the centre of the wall and the arch is loaded by gravity
using sandbags.

xxii

Appendix A

A.11. Analysis of Waarts’ Probabilistic Estimation of Damage
Waarts' framework, originally developed in 1997 to predict damage initiation in
masonry structures exposed to dynamic soil vibrations, was re-evaluated in
detail using contemporary computational techniques. The study introduced
updated material properties derived from recent laboratory tests on pre-1950s
clay-brick and calcium-silicate brick masonry conducted at TU Delft. By
employing Monte Carlo simulations, the updated analysis refines the
framework's ability to estimate the probability of damage under varied
dynamic conditions, making it more statistically robust and reflective of realworld variability.
The framework of Waarts (1997) is a simple, yet powerful method for assessing
the probability for the initiation of damage in masonry structures subjected to
predominantly vertical vibrations from nearby sources. Due to its age and the
way it was conceived, it would seem to be limited in the nature of the
vibrations and its quantification of damage.
While the intent of Waarts framework was to determine a probability of
damage, its linear-elastic approach makes it actually determine the very
initiation of damage, when the first tensile strength is reached. However, it uses
the flexural strength of masonry instead of its tensile strength. If the input
values are replaced with tensile strength, the framework can be used to
determine the initiation of damage.
Limitations not withstanding, when reproducing the framework, the results
obtained are similar to the original curves but differ slightly, presumably due to
differences in the reported input values.
The input values are modified with current knowledge about the material
parameters of vulnerable structures in the area to produce “updated” curves.
These curves are then approximated to log-normal distributions revealing a
good fit in the interval of PGV of 0 to 20 mm/s, in particular for the case of
baked-clay masonry with parameters µ=3.11 and σ=1.21 for an estimation of
slight damage.
Consequently, the probability for the initiation of damage based on the
framework of Waarts (1997) using updated material properties for clay-brick
masonry can be computed directly with a spreadsheet application by invoking
a log-normal distribution and specifying PPV, logarithmic mean, and scale
parameters in a way similar to LN(PPV in mm/s, µ=3.11, σ=1.21).

Appendices

xxiii

A.12. InSAR Analysis of Cyclic Soil Movements in Norg
InSAR satellite data measuring the elevation of the ground surface from the
combination of four satellite datasets can be used to estimate the effect of
(cyclic) deep soil actions caused by extraction and injection of gas in the field
of Norg. The satellite data is post-processed to produce a time lapse of
elevation contours lines; these, in turn, are used to determine the relative
vertical displacements and surface curvatures over select cross-sections across
the 6 km buffer-zone of the gas field. The post-processed data is compared
against GPS measurements and analytical model results for gas reservoir
depletion and storage, revealing no stark dissimilarities and good compatibly
overall. Furthermore, in contrast to thresholds for building damage, the values
of curvature and derived horizontal strains from the satellite elevation data,
appear lower even when considering individual satellite datasets which present
a higher variability and uncertainty. This analysis concludes therefore that
analytical models can well represent ground surface deformations in the
context of deep-soil effects and that observed soil deformations appear below
set thresholds for building damage parameters.
20-Nov-2015

Oost 2
10

-2

53.2
1

0
5

-1

2
1 0
0

0

3

5

4
0

0

8

2

0

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

-1

53

6.25

6.3

-1

6.35

6.4

-1
-10

-2

6.45

6.5

6.55

6.6

Longitude
-15

Figure A.12.1. The buffer zone at Norg overlaid with vertical displacement contours.

A

53.05

0

1

5
4
3

76

2
1

Appendices

1

0

Latitude

-2

1

2

53.1

Elevation in mm

53.15

xxiv

Appendix A

A.13. The Effect of Deep Subsidence on Masonry Façades
The Instituut Mijnbouwschade Groningen (IMG) was interested in determining
whether subsidence caused by gas extraction could also be responsible for
building damage, especially over the gas field of Norg which is also used for
storage of gas. This leads to a seasonal subsidence in late winter and heave in
late summer. The curvatures at the soil surface that occur because of the
subsidence are negligible. Subsidence also leads to horizontal strains, however;
and, while these are small, they have the potential to cause damage since
masonry is sensitive to tensile strains.
To investigate this potential, a series or worst-case scenarios were conceived
and analysed with FEM models of masonry facades. For instance, the worst
locations along the subsidence trough were selected, masonry was assumed to
be weak but stiff, and a high transfer of the horizontal soil strains via the
foundation was selected. For the façade geometries, large openings and long
façades were modelled.
The study concluded that the current and anticipated levels of ground
deformation due to deep subsidence from gas storage operations at Norg do
not cause visible masonry damage. It suggested that similar findings could
likely apply to the Groningen field, assuming comparable conditions of ground
deformation. There were large margins (from 6x to 10x) between the horizontal
strains expected in Norg and the horizontal strains required to cause visible
damage, Ψ=1, in the masonry façades.

Figure A.13.1. One of the façades subjected to horizontal strain at the foundation. Left,
in contraction, caused by subsidence at the centre of the Norg region; and right, in
extension, caused by heave at the centre or by subsidence at the perimeter of the
region.
See Rots, J.G., Korswagen, P.A., Longo, M. (2021). Computational modelling checks of
masonry building damage due to deep subsidence. Delft University of Technology.
Report number 01, Version 05, February 18, 2021. Including Appendices H to J to initial
report, version 6, 8 September 2022.

Appendices

xxv

A.14. The Effect of Combined Horizontal Strain and Curvature
on Masonry Façades from Soil Movements
Another study for IMG looked at the combination of soil horizontal strain, soil
curvature and earthquake vibrations for causing damage to masonry façades.
The first is related to the effects of gas extraction or soil mining, the second
could come from local effects like lowering of the ground water table inducing
changes in the soil, and the third is caused by seismicity. What happens when
façades are subjected to a combination of all three loads?
To investigate this, a two-tiered strategy was used. A block of layered soil, 45 m
long and 12.5 m deep, was used to determine the boundary inputs required to
produce a certain combination of strain and curvature seen at the soil surface.
These are the so-called ‘Greenfield’ strain and curvature, typically obtained
from geotechnical calculations for the deformation expected from tunnelling
and mining. These boundary inputs are then used in an identical soil block with
a masonry façade on top. In this manner, the soil-structure interaction is
included. The models are complex, including non-linear soil modelled with a
small-strain soil hardening model, and with 3D buildings comprising a façade
and its transversal walls. The models are axisymmetric parallel to the façade.
The models reveal for example, that only a portion of the horizontal soil strain
of the soil gets transferred to the façade. However, as the façade develops
cracks and becomes more flexible, more of the strain is transferred.

Appendices

See Korswagen P.A., Longo M., Rots J.G. (2024). Research into the combined
effects of soil strains, soil curvatures and earthquakes from multiple mining
activities on damage to masonry. Delft University of Technology. Report
number 01, First draft version 01, April 9, 2024.

A

Thousands of façade geometries and soil combinations were modelled at
increasing values of strain and curvature for cases of pure horizontal strain, pure
curvature and everything in between. Ψ thresholds for the combination of
strain and curvature were drawn and adjusted when a vibration characterised
with its PGV was included. These results are compared against known limits
from literature proposed by Boscardin and Cording. The figure next focuses on
the soil deformations: for distortions below 8·10-4 coupled with strains below
1·10-4, no visible damage is expected.

xxvi

Appendix A
Expected

10 -2

Value - R 2=0.43

Contours
3432 Models
Boscardin & Cording

=4.0
=3.8

3.25

10 -3

2.75
2.5

3
2.75
2.5

h

4

=3.5

3

=3.2

2.25
2

3

=3.0

1.75

2.25
1.5

2

=2.8

5

1.2

=2.5

1

1.5

1.25

=2.2

3

1.25

10 -4

4
3.75
3.5
3.25

1.5

2.75
2.5
2.25
2
1.75

1.75

1

Horizontal Strain

3.5

3.75

=2.0
=1.8
=1.5

10 -5

=1.0
4

3.5
3.25

1.5

1.25

2.75
2.5
2.25
2
1.75

1

10 -4

3.75

=1.2

10 -3

Angular Distortion

Figure A.14.1. Thresholds for Ψ given a combination of Greenfield tensile horizontal
strain and soil curvature.

Appendices

xxvii

A.15. The Effect of Truck Vibrations in Comparison to
Earthquakes’
A paper presented at the conference of seismic analysis of historical masonry
constructions (SAHC), used FEM models similar to those used in Chapter 5, to
analyse not only the effect of earthquake vibrations but also those of truck
passages. TNO provided the records or acceleration time series for the
passages. To adapt the models to the context of the conference, a historical
masonry façade, with matching material properties were selected. The models
are employed to replicate the geometry of (historical) masonry facades to
determine their sensitivity to light damage as a consequence of the two
damaging processes observed to be most common for this type of façade,
namely (differential) settlements and (earthquake) vibrations.
The masonry façades were first pre-damaged via settlement distortions which
generate just-visible cracks in the order of 0.1 mm to 1 mm in width. Then, an
acceleration time history corresponding to two different Dutch earthquake
events and two recordings of traffic-induced building vibrations were
separately applied at the base of the models. In this manner, the effect of
existing damage could be assessed in regard to the aggravation generated by
vibrations.
The settlement part of the study revealed that long façades were more
vulnerable to applied soil distortions, for instance. Then, subsequent vibrations
further increased damage for intensities measured with a peak ground velocity
(PGV) larger than 2 mm/s while the control set of virgin or uncracked façades
remained undamaged at this PGV. At 32 mm/s, many pre-damaged façades
also exceeded the light damage range. At equal PGV, the traffic vibrations,
with a larger number of effective cycles, resulted in increased damage
aggravation in comparison to the earthquake recordings.

Appendices

• At low values of damage, only a small amount of the soil distortion
underneath the façade foundations is transferred to the masonry leading to
cracks.
• Longer façades required a smaller applied soil distortion to develop visible
damage in comparison to shorter façades. Similarly, these façade geometries

A

The study evaluated two geometrical variations of a double-wythe, fired-clay
brick masonry façade subjected to varying settlement shapes and
subsequently, to seismic and traffic vibrations. The goal is to establish a
relationship between these processes, several façade properties, such as their
length and material strength, and the development of light, crack-based
damage on the façades. We have observed that:

xxviii

were more vulnerable to sagging settlement shapes than hogging shapes.
The settlement shape did not affect the damage increase caused by
subsequent vibrations.
• Vibrations, even with low PGV values of 2 mm/s, increased visible damage in
most cases, while seldom initiated cracks in undamaged façades. In
particular, traffic vibrations lead to increased damage in all pre-damaged
cases investigated.
• At low values of PGV, traffic vibrations lead to twice as much damage as
earthquake vibrations, and to about 30% more damage at high values of
PGV; though these high PGVs are not expected for traffic vibrations.
• Horizontal drift values of 0.4‰ are associated with the upper boundary of
light damage for these historical façades; much lower than comparable drift
limits established for DS1 of regular masonry buildings.
• In fact, when compared against simple masonry walls from an earlier study
[2], seismic vibrations were about 40% more damaging to the historical
façades, and even more severe in the range of 2-4 mm/s.
These observations warrant future, more in-depth analyses looking at important
effects such as the transfer of soil deformations to the shallow foundations,
typical of historical heritage, 3D building effects so far neglected, so as
interlocking with transversal walls, the participation of the floors and their
potential restraining effect, additional vibration sources and more
measurements of traffic vibrations on actual buildings, and more complex
structural typologies and variations. See [20].

Increase in damage
= F- 0

oil Profile Initial Damage

Façade
Material
Length

Settlement
Soil Profile
Shape
Initial Damage

Vibration
MaterialType

Settlement Shape

Vib

2
1.5
1
0.5

Figure A.15.1. Influence of a few parameters on the increase in damage, ∆Ψ, in
particular, the various types of vibrations are compared.

Truck Free Passage

Truck w. Speedbump

Sym. Hogging
Zeerijp Near
Sym. Sagging

Zeerijp Far
Asym. Hogging

Westerwijtwerd Near
Strong

1

Westerwijtwerd Far
Average

0

=0

Truck Free Passage
Weak

0

Peaty
Sym. Sagging

With pre-damage

Sym. Hogging

No initial damage

1

Sandy
Asym. Hogging

Long

Strong

Short

Average

1
0

Weak

=0
0

Peaty
=0

=0
0
Truck w. Speedbump
1
0

0

2.5

0

Sandy

0

Appendix A

Appendix B
Ψ Damage Parameter
B.1. Equations and Definition of Ψ
See also Section 2.2.

Ψ = 2 ⋅ n 0.15 ⋅ cw0.3

Definition of Ψ: Equation 2.4

To determine Ψ on a single type of masonry wall or building with multiple
cracks, the weighted crack width needs to be computed.
n

cw =
ci =

∑i=1 ci2 ⋅ Li

Weighted crack width: Equation 2.3

n

∑i=1 ci ⋅ L i
co2 + cs2

Squared Sum. Equation 2.3b

Where ci is the maximum crack width of crack i, and Li is the length. The crack
width is composed by both the opening (co) and sliding (cs) components.
Table 2.2.2. Comparison Damage States and damage levels with approximate values of
Ψ.
DS1

DS2

Level

DL0

DL1

DL2

DL3

DL4

Ψ

Ψ< 1

1 < Ψ<
1.4

1.5 < Ψ < 2.4

2.5 < Ψ < 3.4

Ψ > 3.5

Aproximate
Crack
Width

Imperceptible
cracks

up to
0.1mm

up to 1mm

up to 5mm

5 to
15mm

B

DS0

Appendices

State

xxx

Appendix B

Table 2.2.3. Overview of the scalar value of Ψ for SLS (black) and ULS (grey).
Values of
Ψ

Description

Representative
Crack Width

Ψ=0

No damage

N.A.

Ψ ≈ 0.5

Invisible damage

< 0.1 mm

Ψ ≥ 1.0

Just-visible light damage

> 0.1 mm

Ψ ≥ 2.0

Easily-observable light
damage

> 1 mm

Ψ ≥ 2.5

Costly light damage

> 2 mm

DS1 or DS2

Ψ ≥ 3.0

End of light damage

> 4 mm

DS2

Ψ ≥ 4.5

Severe.
No longer light damage,
usage of a different damage
metric is recommended.

> 10 mm

DS3

Ψ ≥ 6.0

Very Severe

> 25 mm

DS4

Ψ≥8

Near Collapse

> 50 mm

DS4 or DS5

Damage State
DS0

DS1

L
i
g
h
t
D
a
m
a
g
e
S
t
a
b
i
l
t
y

Damage Increase
The increase in damage can be measured with Ψ by determining ∆Ψ.

ΔΨ = Ψ − Ψ0

Damage Increase: Equation 2.5.

Where Ψ0 is the initial damage condition. Because of the power law of
Equation 2.4, the importance of the absolute damage increase remains
constant within the light damage range (Ψ0<3); this means that an increase of
∆Ψ of 0.2 for instance, will be equally noticeable and affect the cost of repair in
a similar manner for a case of Ψ0=1 or Ψ0=2. In both situations a ∆Ψ of 0.2
represents a measurable increase in damage and is used as the lower threshold
for quantifying an aggravation in crack-based damage.
Relative Increase in Damage: r∆Ψ
The relative increase, ∆Ψ/ Ψ or ∆Ψ/ Ψ0, can also be used to characterise
damage aggravation. However, because Ψ is based on a power law, the
importance of relative increases are dependent on the starting value of Ψ. For
example, an increase of 50% when Ψ0=0.5 doesn’t reach visible damage; but,
if Ψ0=2, the increase of ∆Ψ=1 is significant. For this reason, the r∆Ψ is only

Appendices

xxxi

sporadically used, with a preference instead to the absolute ∆Ψ as presented in
Table 2.2.4.
Table 2.2.4. Overview and thresholds for ∆Ψ when Ψ0 ≥ 1.0.
Values of ∆Ψ

Description

∆Ψ < 0.1

Imperceptible

0.2 > ∆Ψ ≥ 0.1

Only noticeable in comparison photographs

0.5 > ∆Ψ ≥ 0.2

Above 0.2 an increase in damage becomes visible for recurrent
observers

1 > ∆Ψ ≥ 0.5

Evident damage increase, significant influence in the cost of repair

∆Ψ ≥ 1

Increase in damage contributes most to repair cost and detectability;
fully attributable damage

Comparison Ψ
The Ψ parameter has been mainly developed to assess the progression of
damage on a certain specimen or between identical specimens. However,
sometimes different walls or structures would like to be compared to each
other to determine which presents lower or higher damage. In this case, it is
convenient to express a relative version of Ψ based on the surface area of the
masonry:

Ψ′i = Ψi ⋅

Ai ⋅ ζi
Ā

Equation 2.6.

Where Ai is the surface are of the wall i, A̅ is the mean area of the walls
considered and Ψ’ is the relative Ψ. Additionally, if the walls are of different
masonry material, the unitary cost of repair ζ can be included in the
comparison.
Furthermore, if a structure where each wall is monitored separately wants to be
characterised with a single value of Ψ, the damage in the N walls can be
accounted as:

Where Ψ̅ is the mean Ψ value and AT is the sum of the surface areas. However,
Ψ can be directly determined as the sum of all cracks in the structure. If the
unitary cost to repair all walls is similar, this approach is preferred.

B

Equation 2.7.

Appendices

1 N
Ψ̄ =
Ψi ⋅ Ai
AT ∑
i=1

xxxii

Appendix B

B.2. Table with Practical examples of Ψ and ∆Ψ
Table B.1 (left side).
Before

After

n

cw

L

Ψ

n

cw

L

Ψ

1

0.2 mm

NA

1.23

3

0.2 mm
+ 2x 0.1 mm

NA

1.33

1

0.1 mm

NA

1.0

2

0.1 mm

NA

1.11

3

0.1 mm

NA

1.18

3

0.15 mm

NA

1.33

2

0.5 mm
+ 1 mm

0.5 m

2.1

2

0.5 mm
+ 1.2 mm

0.5 m
+1m

2.27

1

0.5 mm

NA

1.62

2

0.5 mm

NA

1.8

1

0.5 mm

NA

1.62

1

0.7 mm

NA

1.8

1

1 mm

NA

2

2

1 mm

NA

2.22

1

0.1 mm

NA

1

1

0.2 mm

NA

1.23

1

1 mm

NA

2.0

1

1.5 mm

NA

2.26

1

0.1 mm

NA

1

5

0.1 mm

NA

1.28

2

0.5 mm
+ 0.5 mm

NA

1.8

2

0.5 mm
+ 1 mm

NA

2.1

3

0.5 mm

NA

1.91

3

1 mm

NA

2.36

1

1 mm

NA

2

1

2 mm

NA

2.46

1

1 mm

NA

2

4

1 mm

NA

2.46

1

0.1 mm

NA

1

15

0.1 mm

NA

1.5

3

0.5 mm

NA

1.92

11

1 mm

NA

2.87

Appendices

xxxiii

r∆Ψ

Observation

0.1

8.1%

An existing crack of 0.2 mm is joined by two new cracks that
become visible.

0.11

11.0%

A second crack of identical width appears, the first crack is
unchanged. Both cracks are narrow.

0.15

12.7%

Three cracks of 0.1 mm all increase in width by 50%.

0.17

8.1%

Two existing cracks, where the wider one increases in width
and length

0.18

11.1%

A second crack of identical width appears, the first crack is
unchanged.

0.18

11.1%

A crack of 0.5 mm increases by 0.2 mm.

0.22

11.0%

A second crack of 1 mm appears

0.23

23.0%

1 barely visible crack doubles in width

0.26

13.0%

A 1 mm crack increases in width by 50%.

0.28

28.0%

Four new cracks become detectable when only one was
before.

0.3

16.7%

Two existing cracks where one doubles in width

0.45

23.6%

Three cracks of 0.5 mm all double in width

0.46

23.0%

A 1 mm crack doubles in width.

0.46

23.0%

Four new cracks of 1 mm appear

0.5

50.0%

Where only one crack was visible, 14 more cracks become
visible

0.95

49.5%

Three cracks of 0.5 mm widen and 8 new cracks of 1 mm
appear

Appendices

∆Ψ

B

Table B.1. (right side, continued). Practical examples of Ψ and ∆Ψ.

xxxiv

Appendix B

B.3. Perception of Damage
Table B.2. Influence values for various non-structural aspects influential in damage
perception. Empiric exemplary values.
1 - Reduces the perception of damage significantly; 2 - Reduces the perception of
damage; 3 - Does not influence; 4 - Increases the perception of damage; 5 - Increases
the perception of damage significantly.
Category

Age

Material
Wall
type

Cavity

Brick
Type

Mortar

Finish

Subcategories

Influence
Value (k)

very old

2

older than 1970

older

3

between 1970 and 2000

Description

new

4

newer than 2000

fired-clay brick

3

often exposed

calcium silicate br.

4

sharper crack edges

slender

4

less than 120mm

thick

3

greater than 120mm

double

2

more than one layer of bricks

without cavity

3

one single leaf

cavity and
aesthetic
cavity
and

4

two leaves, where only one is structural

3

two leaves, both structural

3

units with a height smaller than 150mm

large blocks

4

units with a height larger than 150mm

hollow units

3

units that are not solid

structural
regular
bricks

thin

4

the joints are around 3mm according to EC

free verticals

2

normal

3

vertical joints between the bricks are not
all joints are filled filled
and greater than 3mm

exposed

2

the bricks and joints can be seen

plaster + paint

3

the wall is covered with plaster and painted

mortar + paint

4

the wall is covered with mortar and painted

elastomeric paint

2

wall paper

1

wall is (covered and) painted with flexible
the wall is plasteredpaint
and covered with paper

Appendix C
Supervised MSc Projects
In the extensive period that I was busy with this study, I had the opportunity to
supervise many MSc graduation projects. Some topics were conceived directly
by this work and I was thus the main supervisor of the graduating student. In
other situations, the topic was related to my interests but I didn’t act as the
daily supervisor. And, for yet another portion of the projects, my involvement,
as committee member, was strictly limited to the official progress meetings.
These topics were then related to my knowledge of masonry and/or structural
mechanics.

Appendices

C

In this appendix, I present an overview of the MSc projects with which I was
involved. The complete reports can be found at the university website
repository.tudelft.nl under the section for “education”.

xxxvi

Appendix C

Table C.1. Summary of supervised MSs projects.
#

Title

Student

Non-linear Time History Modelling Of Damage Initiation and
1 Development in an Unreinforced Masonry Cavity Wall Under Outof-plane Loading

Amey Joshi

Structural Window Design For In-plane Seismic Strengthening:
2 Numerical Predictions Of Strengthening Unreinforced Masonry
Structures in Groningen

Arthur de
Groot

3

Hydrodynamic Loading Of Dutch Terraced Houses Due To Flood
Actions Using Computational Fluid Dynamics

4 From the Sea Into the Sky

Benedikt
Bratz

5

Recognizing Critically Damaged Quay Wall Structures Using a
Three-dimensional Numerical Model

Boris
Spiering
Chris van
Hulten

6

Het Effect Van Ontwerpmaatregelen Bij Trein-geïnduceerde
Trillingen in Woongebouwen

Daan
Westerink

Simulation Of the Overall Performance Of Glazed Unitised
7 Curtain Walls Under Seismic Action Through Finite Element
Modelling and Validation Via Full-scale Experimental Testing

Evdokia
Stavridou

8

Multiaxial Compressive Stress States Within a Concrete Onshore
Wind Turbine Foundation

Jelle de
Groot

Nonlinear Modelling Of Non-structural Masonry Walls under a
9 Low-intensity Earthquake Motion: Calibration through a
Parametric Study

Laura Masini

Structural Damage To Dutch Terraced Houses Due To Flood
Actions

Lise Jansen

Experimental Research On the Factors Which Influence the
11 Fleeing Time and Rescue Time Of People Evacuating Flooded
Areas

Marion van
den Bulk

10

12

Experimental Validation Of a Structural Glass Window Design For
In-plane Seismic Strengthening

13 Flood Fragility Of a Cavity Wall
14

Finite Element Analysis Of Building Deformations Due To Deep
Excavations

Mehmet Kisa
Mick van
Haren
Mohammed
Harrouni

Appendices
Student

Dynamic Modelling Of Crack Damage At the Interface Of Non15 structural Masonry walls and the Structure Due To earthquake
Motion

Nikita Cattini

16 Stabilising Buildings With Glass

Parviz Azamy

17

Probability Of Damage Of Masonry Structures Due To External
Ground Vibrations

Pieter Potuijt

18

Validation Of a Thermo-mechanical Fe Model Of Onshore Wind
Turbine Foundation

Pragya
Mukherjee

The Historic Quay Walls Of Amsterdam: a Study Into the Hidden
19 Structural Capacity Of Masonry Quay Walls Under the Condition
Of a Partly Failing Foundation

Rick
Voortman

20

Developing a Diagnostic Assessment Tool To Evaluate Damage in
Buildings

Rick Willems

21

A Hyperbolic Model For Degradation in Tension Mode-i Fracture
Of Masonry

Srinidhi
Bindiganavile
-Ramadas

22 Photogrammetric Deformation Analysis Of a Quay Wall
23

Rocking Revisited Analysis Of Rocking-induced Stresses For
Concrete Breakwater Armour Units

Stijn Lodder
Thomas
Goud

C

Title

Appendices

#

xxxvii

Appendix D
Glossary
Various terms and concepts employed throughout this work are gathered and
defined in this section. Some concepts vary in definition depending on the
field of engineering and the authors. The list presented here and the
definitions as used in this work.
Aggravation, Accumulation. These terms are almost synonyms; they refer to
an increase in damage. The first is employed to describe a worsening of the
damage: damage is aggravated. The second conveys a worsening over
repeated actions: damage accumulates due to the effect of various actions or
events. “Cumulation" is also a related term, it means to gather several effects.
“Accumulate” is similar but progressive.

Damage Evolution

2.5

n
tio
a
l
mu
cu
c
A

2

1.5

= 0.93

Damage Measurement over Time
Prediction based on First 10 Years

Hastening: 1.8x

Aggravation

3

1

2 Effects: Cumulation
0.5

0

Situation 1
0

2

4

6

8

Situation 2
10

12

14

16

18

20

Action/loading. The action of a hazard is essentially how the hazard affects
structures. It is the direct impact or the mechanism through which a hazard
imposes stress or damage on a structure. For example, while a storm itself is
the hazard, the wind pressure it generates against the side of a building is

Glossary

Figure D.1. Aggravation and accumulation of damage.

D

Years

xl

Appendix D

considered its action. The modelling or presentation of the action is a load or
loading. Similarly, in the case of a fire, the hazard is the fire itself, while the
increase in temperature or temperature gradient it causes on structural
elements represents the action; the load, in this case, is an internal strain on
the material.
Calibration, validation. The modelling strategy and the parameters employed
in models are adjusted and contrasted against another source, typically
experimental results.
Cracks, cracking, fracture. When (quasi-)brittle materials reach their tensile
strength, the material fractures. The fracture opens into a crack. This is called
cracking.
Damage scale, damage state, grade. In a scale used to assess the intensity of
damage, the several steps are called grades or states. Each state or grade in
the scale is based on descriptions of the damage or is classified in combination
with a measurement or indicator.
Degradation. It refers to the decrease or worsening of a measure. The strength
of masonry can degrade over time, or, its capacity can degrade because of a
particular action.
DIC. Digital Image Correlation is a photogrammetry technique where digital
photographs are using to measure the displacements or deformations of an
object.
Drift. It is the ratio of the lateral, horizontal displacement and the inter-storey
height. In this study, the applied displacement at the top of the wall divided by
the height of the wall gives the drift. While unitless, it is usually expressed in
mm/m.
Extrapolation, exploration. An extrapolation is the conducted when, based on
known parameters, new situations are concluded. In this work, models
calibrated against specific loads are used to explore the effects or other loads.
Façade, Wall. A façade is one of the outer walls of a building, typically the
architecturally most important wall. In this study, ‘façade’ is used to convey a
geometrically more complex wall, typically with a larger area. A ‘wall’ is thus a
simpler façade. Walls are used as a proxy for façades and buildings in this
study.
FEM. The finite-element-method subdivides a structural problem in a large
but finite number of small pieces or elements that can be analysed
independently.

Appendices

xli

Fragility, vulnerability. The response of a structure or component to a certain
hazard, expressed in terms of probability, represents its fragility. At increasing
hazard intensity, the probability of failure increases. This relationship is called a
fragility or vulnerability curve.
Hastening. The earlier arrival to a certain damage condition because of the
contribution of a particular hazard. The damage evolution is accelerated. This
concept is central to Chapter 6.
Hazard. A hazard, in structural engineering, refers to any condition, event, or
factor that has the potential to cause harm to structures, infrastructure, or the
occupants of buildings. Hazards can be natural, like storms, floods, or
earthquakes, or anthropogenic, such as terrorist attacks, fires, or traffic. These
hazards represent the various risks that can impact the integrity and safety of
built environments and the people within them. A hazard is a danger; a multihazard involves several hazards. ‘Normal’ loads, like the design live load for a
housing building, consisting of people and furniture, are also hazards; a small
probability of overloading by the weight of people exists.
Propagation, initiation. The beginning of cracking in masonry is referred to as
the initiation of damage. When cracks lengthen and widen (damage is
aggravated), a propagation of the crack is taking place.
Metric, measure. A parameter used to indicate or quantify damage. The width
or the extend of cracks, for example, can be a measure of damage. Drift, is
often employed as an indirect metric of structural capacity.
NLTHA. Is an acronym for Non Linear Time History Analysis. It is a numerical
procedure involving a model with a non-linear material. The load steps become
time steps in a dynamic analysis. Usually, a history of a load or acceleration
over time is applied to the model. In earthquake engineering, a NLTHA refers
to an analysis of an earthquake vibration.

Shear-wall, Pier. In a structural context, when the design of an element is
governed by shear, one can speak of a shear element. In buildings with
columns and walls, against high lateral loads, walls quickly become shear-walls.

Glossary

Repetition. A recurrence of an action or an event. The effect of repetition is
used to describe the contribution (in terms of damage increase) or a repeating
action.

D

Psi (Ψ). The greek letter Ψ, pronounced /psi/ in greek and not (p)sʌɪ in English
is used as a continuous damage scale comprising the width, length and
number of cracks in a masonry construction. See Chapter 2.

xlii

Appendix D

In this study, the wall without openings acts as a shear-wall. The wall with an
opening in turn, has two piers next to its opening which fail in flexion.
Shrinkage. The contraction of masonry due to hardening effects of the mortar
soon after construction. This is not to be confused with the contraction
occurring from temperature changes.
Transitory, transient damage. Refers to temporary damage a structure
experiences during specific events, such as earthquakes, which may not reflect
its permanent condition. Unlike residual damage, which is long-lasting,
transitory damage can change or become less noticeable after the event. Since
damage aggravates based on previous damage, using the maximum transitory
damage is required.
Wythe. Pronounced exactly as width - is the thickness of a masonry wall. A
single-wythe wall has the thickness of a brick. A double-wythe wall has the
thickness of two bricks, usually one brick length. In Dutch this can be confusing,
because the length of a brick is used as the measure of the thickness of a wall.
So, a double-wythe wall is actually a ‘full-brick-long’.

Appendix E
Loppersum Visit

Figure E.1. A street sign with guidance to neighbouring towns. I visited several of these
towns over the years.

Appendix

E

On the first of November of 2022 I was in Loppersum for a small conference.
The day after I wrote a small note. This is it.

xliv

Memoir uit Loppersum

Appendix E

2 November 2022

Paul Korswagen - TU Delft
I arrived late the night before the first of november and went to sleep in the
only hotel I had found listed in Loppersum. That I could see “Ons Dorphuis”,
the location of the kennistafel that would take place at noon the next day, was
both a nice coincidence and an unavoidable circumstance in such a small
village.
Because Loppersum is a small town, as I would find out the next morning when
I took a two-hour stroll through most of its streets. In the time I was walking
around, sometimes checking a map that I didn’t need anymore after the first
hour, I must have managed to see all the old houses. That is also what makes
Loppersum so charismatic. The free-standing houses are all different, some
older, some with gables or turtle roofs, almost none with a rectangular
footprint. These houses were not built in series and it seems each must have its
own stories.
“Do you find the houses so nice?” said an old lady who had been sweeping
away the fallen leaves of autumn and had seen me make a few pictures with my
phone. It was quite windy, so I’m not sure sweeping the leaves made much
sense.
“Yes, they are all different and with character.” I replied.
“They give Loppersum the real feeling of a town” she added.
“Yes, you can walk across the town in a few minutes and at the edges you see
large green fields” I complemented.
The exchange was in dutch but she didn’t ask me where I came from.
“It’s really nice despite all our misery” she commented. I didn’t reply but
looked a bit worried. Did a topic about houses always led to talking about
earthquakes?
“With the earthquakes, they created lots of problems. At the end of this street
you will see a neighbourhood with new houses. It was needed because our
houses are not safe.” She explained.
“Oh.”
“But now they are starting to strengthen the houses” She pointed at the house
across the street. “They will also start with my house. They will keep only the
façade and the rest will be replaced. Just like a few houses you will see further
ahead if you keep walking”.

Appendices

xlv

“Is this your house, it’s quite beautiful; I like it”. I said
“They will start soon, they have promised.”.
“But I think that is really a good solution. They are keeping the nice and
characteristic part of the houses while making them safe then.” I said.
She didn’t want to agree. “We started in 2016. It’s been a long time until
something is happening. I’m 75; I don’t think I will be back in that house.”
“Oh, you think so?” I didn’t know what to say as the conversation turned
dark. ”I hope that is not the case.”
“Well, I have to head back inside. Enjoy Loppersum.” The old lady said.
“Thank you and have a nice day.” I finished the conversation.

E

On the same street I saw three houses in scaffolds. Other houses were getting
new roof insulation, new bricks, or even solar panels. As I walked around town,
I was actually surprised to find at least one container for debris in every street;
there were many vans of construction companies.

I didn’t see much damage, but I was also not inspecting the masonry from up
close. There were cracks around windows, on the piers, above the foundation,
and at the corners. In most cases, the cracks were more visible because they

Appendix

Figure E.2. Scaffolding on the street.

xlvi

Appendix E

had been repaired and the mortar looked new. They were the same sort of
cracks you see when walking around the centre of Delft.
I only saw one case that really pulled my attention. It was a house with lime
mortar. It had clearly settled over time but there were no cracks. Below the
window, a bedjoint went up to the level of the next bedjoint and then back
down; the deformation was plastic and maybe took place over a long time but
- no cracks.
The church and its large tower were also being remodelled with safety as a
priority. Some houses had windows filled-in with masonry. Is that for
strengthening?
Loppersum has a train station that tangentially touches the town. There were
houses on both sides with only one street crossing the tracks. I saw a few
houses for sale but there were no “sold” stickers attached to the signs.
By the time I circled back to that street in the centre, the old lady was gone
and so were the leaves.

Figure E.3. At close inspection, the bed joints appear plastically deformed.

Appendices

xlvii

Kennistafel
I had seen the Dorphuis already as I had walked past it a few times. “I saw you
go by half an hour ago” said Chris Geurts. Apparently they had come earlier
and had been having lunch inside. “Yes, I was walking around and looking at
the houses.” I replied.
The kennistafel included two interesting presentations and a round of
discussions where everyone present got to tell a bit about what they were
doing or where they work and what questions they could add to the topic
about preventing damage. Please see the agenda and my technical notes
attached to this text.
Two contributions stood out from inhabitants of the region that also worked in
related subjects. The first criticised that IMG was thinking about preventing
damage when they hadn’t yet addressed the other problems, and added that
IMG and NCG should work together more. The second doubted that the
strengthening did anything, added that it wasn’t necessary. Both men
appeared frustrated with the situation and wanted the topic of earthquakes to
be out of their lives. A lady working at a different gemeente was actually quite
happy with the strengthening projects.
During the “borrel” at the end of the afternoon, I talked with Jacob Mink from
a company that specialises in adding micropiles to houses with foundation
problems. I asked about whether they had “bed joint measures” which they
did with a total-station instead of water hoses. They also had damage reports
and promised to fix the damage by lifting up the settled foundations in specific
places. They also always conducted CPTs at the locations.

Figure E.4. The location of the village hall or community centre.

Appendix

E

I explained that we would be very interested to find relationships between
deformations in the houses, the soil beneath them, and the damage observed.
We exchanged emails but I’m not sure what we could offer them.

xlviii

Appendix E

Figure E.5. Some additional examples of buildings in the town of Loppersum.

Appendix F
Dataset
https://doi.org/10.4121/58d1f5e6-5db3-4a74-a3d1-6e88a3bd8bce
PhD dissertations at the TU Delft must provide background research data.
Typically, much of the data has been published along side core publications. In
this case, experiments have continued and so, earlier data may be segmented
or incomplete. For this purpose, a summative dataset is provided.
The data is referenced by the above doi and can also be accessed via this link:

edu.nl/jfe8w

The repository gathers essentially three packages:
1) ExperimentalData.mat
Containing measurements from the wall experiments for all masonry wall tests.
Including Force, Drift, and Ψ.
2) Zip files with DIC processed data
Compressed .csv files with the horizontal (X) and vertical (Z) displacement fields
as determined with DIC. Refer to ExperimentalData.mat for folder and file
names associated with the experimental data.

A ReadMe file included in the repository details additional metadata.

Appendix

With the results of the extrapolation models. Tabular Diana output files and
processed Ψ values are collected.

F

3) ComputationalData.mat

Appendix G
Tool for Crack Tracking
In the experimental context, crack tracking refers to the technique where an
individual crack is detected and recognised as such on a (masonry) sample, and
tracked throughout the test. This requires the following:

- Detecting local opening and sliding,
- Gathering neighbouring cracked points into the notion of a single crack,
- Computing the properties of the crack in terms of width and length,
- Recognising the same crack over multiple measurement instances, even as
the crack propagates or remains closed at certain instances.
This appendix presents an overview of the Digital Image Correlation technique
adapted for this purpose. The validation against ‘traditional’ sensors is also
included.

G.1. Application of DIC for Monitoring of Masonry Test
Samples in the Laboratory

- Capable of tracking a large number of points simultaneously on the sample's
surface, providing a comprehensive view of displacements and facilitating
detailed analysis of crack propagation.

Appendix

- Non-contact Measurement: Reduces the risk of damaging sensitive
equipment and minimises interference with the specimen under test, such as
obscuring potential cracks.

G

Digital Image Correlation (DIC) is a non-contact measurement technique widely
utilised in laboratory settings to monitor displacements and deformations in
masonry test samples. This method employs digital imaging to capture
displacement fields across a specimen by comparing differences between two
sequentially captured images. The process identifies differential displacements
which are crucial for detecting and analysing the progression of cracks in
masonry structures. DIC offers two primary advantages over traditional
displacement measurement techniques:

lii

Appendix G

This technique is adaptable to various scales and complexities of structural
testing, from small components to large masonry walls, and can be
implemented in both two-dimensional and three-dimensional formats. DIC's
flexibility and precision make it particularly useful for the challenges posed by
masonry testing where traditional sensors may fail to capture unforeseen crack
locations and behaviours. In this work, DIC has been used only on planar
surface to monitor in-plane displacements.
Implementation and Optimisation in the Laboratory
Developed in-house, this specific DIC system aims to maximise the resolution
of displacement fields. This development focuses on enhancing the clarity of
detected discontinuities, such as cracks, while maintaining reasonable
computation times and utilising straightforward photographic equipment.
In a structural mechanics lab environment, where the accurate measurement of
forces and displacements is essential, DIC proves invaluable. Traditional
sensors, such as Linear Variable Differential Transformers (LVDTs), are effective
for monitoring specific crack movements but are limited by their need for direct
contact and fixed placement. DIC overcomes these limitations by using
photogrammetry to evaluate the entire specimen, enabling the detection of
crack initiation and progress over a large area and at numerous points.
Technical Advantages and Laboratory Application
DIC has been successfully applied to various masonry tests to detect and
monitor cracks (Tung et al. 2008; Ghorbani et al. 2015). Its application ranges
from detecting small-scale discontinuities to tracking large-scale deformations
across the entire specimen. Optimisations specific to our laboratory's needs
include refining the correlation algorithms and speckle patterns—the latter
being crucial for accurately capturing the displacements. Gehri et al. (2020)
worked on similar improvements.
Further, the system's design ensures that it can capture a dense array of
displacement points, allowing for the detailed mapping of cracks as they
develop. Such comprehensive monitoring is crucial to understanding the
behaviour of masonry under test conditions, particularly in assessing the
material's response to stress and identifying potential failure points.
The following sections will discuss the specific capabilities of DIC in producing
various types of plots and visual representations, the theoretical foundation of
the technique, and the practical implementations of the hardware and software
systems supporting it. Each of these aspects plays a critical role in harnessing
the full potential of DIC for structural analysis and research.

Appendices

liii

G.2. Theory and Programming of DIC
Basic Concepts
Digital Image Correlation involves capturing digital photos of the sample at
specific intervals. These images are used in the correlation process to
determine the displacement field of the sample. Depending on the desired
accuracy and scale of the test, one or more cameras may be required, and a
special pattern might need to be applied to the sample to facilitate accurate
tracking.
Subsets and Gridpoints
The correlation process starts with an initial or 'base' image that serves as the
reference to which subsequent images are compared. The base image is
divided into smaller sections called 'subsets', which are then located in the
subsequent images. If the subsets remain unchanged, they are found in the
same positions; if not, their movements indicate displacements.
Four assumptions can be made when tracking subsets:

- The subsets have displaced without rotating and deforming.
- The subsets have displaced and rotated.
- The subsets have displaced, rotated, and deformed.
- Alternatively, the subsets are destroyed and cannot reasonably be found.
For masonry testing in our laboratory, the assumption typically holds that
subsets undergo minimal rotation and no deformation, reflecting the brittle
nature of masonry and the small-scale displacements observed. In in-plane
tests, where only horizontal and vertical movements are relevant, the problem
simplifies further, requiring potentially only one camera and treating the
situation as two-dimensional.
Search Zone and Grid Size

Appendix

The output of the DIC process is not continuous across the specimen but
instead focuses on specific 'gridpoints' within the defined 'area of interest'. The
accuracy and resolution of the correlation depend on the size of the subsets
and the density of the gridpoints, which in turn are influenced by the quality
and resolution of the images used. See Figure G.2.1 for an overview of these
terms.

G

The 'search zone' limits where the subsets are expected to be found, speeding
up the computation by reducing the area of search. This is useful when dealing
with small displacements typically seen in masonry tests.

liv

Appendix G

Figure G.2.1. Scheme of main parameters. Area of interest (with an opening) within the
image.

Solution Algorithm
Image correlation in DIC can be approached in various ways, but the most
straightforward and effective method for detecting cracks in masonry involves
treating each subset independently. This discrete method compares potential
positions of a subset in sequential images, selecting the position that
maximises the Pearson correlation coefficient.
To achieve sub-pixel accuracy, necessary for detecting minute displacements,
interpolation techniques are used. This allows DIC to precisely determine how
much a subset has moved, even if the displacement is less than the size of a
pixel.
Moreover, since the correlation of each point is independent of any other point
in the image, multiple points can be solved simultaneously. On multi-processor
or multi-core systems the correlation of a single image can be significantly sped
up. This is particularly advantageous when using DIC to assist in laboratory
testing where the processing of a single image must occur as fast as possible.
Crack Detection
1. Initial Detection of Discontinuities
The DIC algorithm begins with the detection of discontinuities in the
displacement fields generated from the series of images captured during

Appendices

lv

testing. This step is crucial for identifying potential cracks before more detailed
analysis takes place.

- Subsets Analysis: Each image is divided into subsets. The algorithm
compares these subsets between successive images to detect shifts that
indicate displacements both vertically and horizontally.

- Gradient Thresholding: By calculating the gradients of displacement
between these subsets, the algorithm can highlight areas with abrupt
changes, which often signify the edges of cracks.

- Noise Reduction: To distinguish genuine cracks from noise, a filtering
process is applied, often utilising morphological operations that enhance the
features of interest while suppressing irrelevant variations.
If the results are imported directly from computational exports, a third input
matrix is expected already containing the discontinuities (crack width) per cell.
From here on, both experimental (laboratory) and computational (FEM) cases
are treated equally by the program.
2. Grouping of Discontinuities
Once potential cracks are identified, the next step involves grouping these
discontinuities to form coherent crack patterns. This phase is critical for
mapping the entire crack trajectory across the specimen.

- Spatial Clustering: Discontinuities that are spatially close to each other and
align in a pattern suggestive of a crack are grouped together.

- Connectivity Analysis: The algorithm employs connectivity criteria, where
adjacent pixels showing similar displacement anomalies are linked to form
continuous lines or curves, reflecting the crack path.

Appendix

Because the line scan moves forward, it may fail to group cracks in a certain
pattern. It is thus necessary to iteratively look for and merge neighbouring
groups. The algorithm compares a random coordinate of crack 1 with a random
coordinate of crack 2. If they are found to be relatively close, all coordinates of
crack 1 are compared to every coordinate of crack 2; if any are found to be

G

Neighbouring cells with discontinuities are assigned a crack number. The
grouping algorithm executes a line scan in two directions and checks whether a
cell with a discontinuity value neighbours other “cracked” cells. If it does, then
it receives the crack number of neighbouring cells, if the neighbouring cells do
not have a crack number yet, a new crack number is created. The coordinates
of every cell with the same crack number is registered in a matrix for this crack
number.

lvi

Appendix G

neighbouring (the comparison stops here), the matrices of coordinates are
merged, crack 2 is removed from the list of valid crack numbers, and the matrix
with crack numbers per cell is overwritten for all coordinates of crack 2. This is
done for all valid crack numbers without repeating any crack number
combinations. After all cracks have been compared, the process is run again to
further merge nearby groups of discontinuities. The merge iterations continue
until no more groups can be merged, or up to a customisable limit number of
runs.
The final output of this module are: a few matrices containing the coordinates
of all the cells that belong to each group, the main matrix with the crack
number of each cell, and a list with all valid crack numbers.
3. Removal of crack noise
The following groups of cells (cracks) are considered noise and eliminated from
the list with valid crack numbers:

- Groups with a few cells (customisable, the minimum is 1).
- Groups forming a crack with a length shorter than specified (default 100mm).
- Groups forming a shape resembling a circle, spot, or cloud.
- Cracks appearing in less than 1% of the number of images (when multiple
cases are analysed).
4. Refinement and Characterisation of Cracks
After initial grouping, further refinement is necessary to accurately characterise
each crack, determining its width, length, and orientation.

- Width Calculation: The width of each detected crack is estimated by
measuring the gap between the displacement fields on either side of the
crack. This measurement considers the highest displacement gradients to
define the crack.

- Length and Orientation: The overall length of the crack and its orientation
are determined by tracking the grouped discontinuities from one end to the
other. Advanced algorithms calculate the geometric centre-line of the crack
and use it to define these parameters.

- Ψ based on number, width and length of cracks.
5. Validation and Tracking
For dynamic tests where images are captured over time under varying loads,
the algorithm tracks the development of each crack across the image series.

Appendices

lvii

This involves identifying and linking the same crack across different images,
observing changes in its length, width, and direction.
If multiple cases are evaluated, it is possible to unify the results by uniquely
identifying cracks throughout the cases. This is done by comparing the
coordinates of each crack and merging of the crack data in time. The process is
retroactive, meaning that if two cracks eventually extend into one, they are
identified as a single crack from the beginning.
The crack progression data is exported as a spreadsheet and as graphs. Width,
length, and damage progression graphs can also be exported. Additionally, a
spreadsheet file with multiple sheets (one for general properties and one for
each crack), and a graph showing the nomenclature of cracks is exported.
Furthermore, “trail plots” will be computed and exported. These plots show
the width of the crack along its entire length and reveal progression by the
darkening of colour. It is possible that individual lines in these plots are outliers,
but the general behaviour can be quite interesting.
Moreover, crack surfaces and all the data above are exported into a “crack
output” file that can be read with a separate application. This small application
allows the visualisation and animation of crack data in 3D.
6. Quantitative Analysis and Reporting
The final phase involves quantitative analysis and the generation of reports that
provide detailed information about the detected cracks.
- Quantitative Metrics: Detailed metrics such as crack width, total crack length,
and average width are computed, providing valuable insights into the overall
integrity and deterioration of the specimen.
- Visualisation: Visual reports are generated, often overlaying detected cracks
on the original images or providing schematic representations of the cracks.
These visualisations are crucial for both technical assessments and
presentations to non-specialist stakeholders.

The DIC software developed for our laboratory applications is capable of
running multi-processor or multi-core systems to expedite the analysis of large
image files. It includes functionalities for loading images, defining coordinates,

Appendix

Software and Tools

G

- Data Export: For further analysis or archival purposes, the crack data, along
with associated metrics, are exported in formats compatible with other
engineering analysis tools.

lviii

Appendix G

and exporting results in various formats, including graphical plots and data
files.
FemPsi
In parallel with the custom DIC solution, a program to import FEM results and
process cracking was also formulated. The program is called FemPsi. Since
finite-element-model results already include crack width information at the
integration point level, collected at every load step. Adapting the DIC code,
which consolidates cracked points into the notion of a crack and tracks each
crack over time, was trivial. The aforementioned steps, from 2 to 6, are virtually
unchanged.

Appendices

lix

G.3. Optimisation and Calibration of DIC
Optimisation of the DIC Setup
Optimising the DIC setup is critical for achieving precise and reliable
measurements. This section covers the integral components of the setup, from
the pattern applied on the specimens to the camera configurations used for
capturing images.
Pattern Layout
The clarity and uniqueness of the speckle pattern on the test specimen are
essential for accurate DIC analysis. The pattern must provide sufficient contrast
and sharpness for the DIC software to track movements accurately.
- For Small Samples: When working with smaller specimens, a finely detailed
pattern can be created using sponges or foam rollers with viscous paint. In
scenarios where masonry joints are recessed, techniques like sandblasting with
fresh paint or applying matte glue are used to achieve a controllable pattern
granularity. A spray gun with an adjustable nozzle can also produce an
adequate pattern.
- For Larger Specimens: Techniques suitable for smaller samples do not scale
well to larger specimens such as full masonry walls. Here, larger, more distinct
patterns applied via positive or negative moulds are necessary. These patterns
must be sizeable enough to be trackable from a distance but small enough to
ensure small subsets and enable high-resolution data capture. The ideal
pattern involves shapes spaced 4 to 6 pixels apart, with each subset
comprising at least 10x10 pixels to ensure a trackable and unique pattern.

Appendix

G

Example: Figure G.3.1 presents a portion of a masonry wall featuring a coarse
pattern using a positive mould at the top and a finer pattern with a negative
mould at the bottom. The coarse pattern requires larger subsets (25x25 pixels),
whereas the finer pattern allows for smaller subsets (12x12 pixels), enhancing
the resolution of the displacement field.

lx

Appendix G

Figure G.3.1. Comparison between two speckle patterns.

Camera Setup
Optimal camera setup is paramount for capturing clear and usable images for
DIC processing.

- The specimen should be centrally framed in the camera's viewfinder to
ensure consistent imaging and minimise lens distortion.

- Alignment is critical, especially for in-plane displacement analysis. The
camera’s sensor plane must be parallel to the specimen's plane. For vertical
walls, this might involve using a tripod with a level. A small mirror placed on
the specimen can help verify this alignment by reflecting the camera lens
when perfectly parallel.

- Uniform lighting is crucial to minimise shadows and reflections. This can be
achieved using flashes, DC lamps, screens, or reflectors. Proper lighting
ensures consistent image quality unaffected by natural light variations.

- A high-resolution camera with a sharp prime lens is recommended. Natural
focal lengths (50mm for 35mm equivalent) are ideal, though slightly wider
lenses (35mm) may be necessary for large specimens.

- The camera should be mounted on a tripod and operated either with a timer
or remotely to prevent shaking.

Appendices

lxi

- Manual camera settings are crucial:
- ISO: Set as low as possible to reduce noise.
- Focus: Manually adjusted and locked.
- Aperture: Around f/8.0 to optimise depth of field and sharpness.
- Exposure: Adjusted via flash or shutter settings to maximise pattern
contrast.
Additional settings such as mirror lockup, JPEG compression settings, and
black-and-white modes can further enhance image quality.
Understanding Noise and Error

Calibration is crucial in ensuring that the Digital Image Correlation system
provides accurate and reliable measurements. This process involves comparing

Appendix

Figure G.3.2. Random noise with a maximum error of 0.025 pixels when analysing two
images of zero displacement. Areas with a good pattern result in significantly less noise
(around 0.01 pixels).

G

Noise and error can significantly affect the quality of DIC results. These can
arise from various sources, such as camera sensor issues, environmental factors
like dust or temperature changes, and inherent limitations in the image
processing algorithms. Systematic calibration and the use of sophisticated
noise-reduction algorithms are essential for minimising these effects and
ensuring the integrity of the displacement data obtained from DIC.

lxii

Appendix G

DIC results with known standards or other validated measurement techniques
under controlled test conditions. Here, we detail the types of calibration tests
performed, the methodologies applied, and the key considerations for each.
Test Configurations and Methodology
Calibration tests are designed to closely mimic expected real-experiment
conditions but within a controlled environment to precisely evaluate the
performance of the DIC system. Each test aims to validate different aspects of
the DIC system—from its ability to detect small displacements to its precision
in tracking complex deformations.
1. Sliding Test (Linear Displacement)
Objective: To assess the system's accuracy in detecting linear displacements.
Setup: Two plates, each painted with a high-contrast DIC pattern, are arranged
in parallel. One plate remains fixed while the other slides linearly along a track,
simulating straightforward, controlled displacement.
Measurement: Displacement between the plates is measured using both DIC
and traditional linear displacement sensors (e.g., LVDTs) attached to the back of
the moving plate.
Analysis: Comparisons are made between the sensor readings and DIC
measurements to determine the system’s accuracy. The consistency of these
measurements across multiple trials helps identify any systematic errors or
biases in the DIC setup.
On the back of the plates are sensors that measure the rotation of the upper
plate with respect to the lower one. The first step is to perform the test
keeping the steel plates against which the sensors react perfectly parallel to the
opening. During the test a picture is taken every 0.1 mm, then a comparison
between the sensor reading and the DIC is performed. Also during this test, it
can be observed that the overlapping between the two curves is very good
with an error of ± 0.01mm and a standard deviation equal to 0.01.
2. Rotation Test (Angular Displacement)
Objective: To evaluate the DIC system’s capacity to measure angular
displacements. Setup: Similar to the sliding test but with the moving plate able
to rotate around a hinge. Measurement: Angular displacement is quantified
using linear sensors fixed relative to the hinge point, alongside DIC
measurements.
Sensor 1 is the closest to the hinge thus showing the lowest displacement,
while sensor 3 is the one subjected to the biggest opening.

Figure G.3.3. Setup and results of the sliding test. Note the size of the pattern relative
to the photo frame and the actual resolution of the image. The camera was placed at
the same distance as during the tests on masonry walls. The picture appears dark but
lightning is optimised for the portion with the pattern.

G

lxiii

Appendix

Appendices

lxiv

Appendix G

Figure G.3.4. Rotation test.

Calibration Outcomes and Adjustments
The results from these calibration tests are critical for fine-tuning the DIC
system:

- Direct comparisons between DIC readings and sensor data allow for
adjustments in software algorithms and imaging techniques, ensuring that
DIC can offer reliable measurements across a range of conditions.

Appendices

lxv

- Findings from calibration tests can lead to improvements in hardware setups,
such as adjustments in camera angles, lighting configurations, or changes in
the speckle pattern to enhance measurement precision.

- Calibration helps in identifying and quantifying potential sources of error,
such as optical distortions, environmental influences on sensors, or
algorithmic biases in image processing.

Ongoing calibration is essential as the DIC system evolves with technological
advancements and as new applications emerge. Enhanced calibration routines,
possibly incorporating machine learning algorithms for error correction and

Appendix

Future Directions

G

Figure G.3.5. Free sliding and rotation test on a thicker timber block.

lxvi

Appendix G

adaptive thresholding, could further improve the reliability and accuracy of DIC
measurements. Moreover, extending calibration protocols to include threedimensional analysis will broaden the applicability of DIC in complex structural
assessments and dynamic testing environments.
In conclusion, meticulous calibration is integral to leveraging the full
capabilities of DIC technology in structural engineering, ensuring that the data
obtained is both accurate and actionable for diagnostic and research purposes.

Curriculum Vitæ
13 May 1988

Born in Lima, Perú
Parents:
Dr. Liliana M.I. Eguren Corso
Prof.dr. Richard P. Korswagen Edery

2007 — 2012

Bachelor of Science (BSc)
mention in Civil Engineering
Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú (PUCP), Lima, Perú

2012

Title Civil Engineer (Ing.)
Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú (PUCP), Lima, Perú
Thesis:

2012 — 2014
2014 — 2016

Seismic Isolation of Buildings

Structural Design Engineer
Antonio Blanco Blasco Ingenieros EIRL, Lima, Perú
www.abbings.com
Master of Science (MSc) in Civil Engineering
Specialisation: Structural Engineering / Hydraulic Structures
Delft University of Technology (TU Delft), The Netherlands
Thesis:
Structural Damage to Masonry Housing due to
Earthquake-Flood Multi-hazards
PhD in Structural Mechanics
Delft University of Technology (TU Delft), The Netherlands
Thesis:
Quantifying the probability of light damage to
masonry structures
Promotors: Prof.dr.ir. Jan G.Rots
Dr. ir. Karel C. Terwel

Curriculum Vitæ

2017 — 2024

P ROPOSITIONS
accompanying this dissertation
1. The probability of visible damage or noticeable damage
aggravation at the perimeter of the Groningen buffer zone due to
earthquake vibrations does not exceed 1% even for masonry walls
with pre-existing cracks. (*)
2. Repetition of light vibrations, as in the Groningen field, can lead to a
damage increase of up to 10%. (*)
3. Damage that is not defined, cannot be measured. (*)
4. Light damage only matters if someone else is responsible.
5. Heating buildings is an archaic practice. With modern insulation and
conscious design, buildings wouldn’t need any active heating.
6. The only way to solve a housing crisis is to create more housing:
adapt existing buildings into housing and build more and affordable
houses, too.
7. Without understanding and quantifying the risk to buildings, new
technologies, like geothermal energy, should not be deployed.
8. Masonry can be the most sustainable of building materials.
9. It is more important to formulate a clear path and skip some steps
than to stop at each step exhaustively and not reach the end.
10. When life doesn't let you pursue your hobbies, like photography,
then adapt them, like photogrammetry.

These propositions are regarded as opposable and defendable, and
have been approved as such by the promotor Prof.dr.ir Jan G. Rots
and the co-promotor Dr.ir. Karel C. Terwel.

Propositions

(*) These propositions pertain to the dissertation.

Acknowledgements
This research was performed as part of several projects. It began as a study for
NAM and NCG. Later, a PhD project was conceived from this research. It was
mainly funded by NAM, in management by Jan van Elk and Jeroen
Uilendreef. Their feedback and confirmation during spaced progress meetings
I still value today. In this part of the project, guidance was provided also by
Beatriz Zapico Blanco and Michele Palmieri from ARUP, who helped simplify
difficult choices. A parallel project from NAM, focused on analysing the
structural capacity of NeHoBo floors, was helpful in advancing modelling
strategies and characterising experiments in the lab; for their feedback and
guidance, I am thankful to Dick den Hertog and Reza Sarkhosh, and for her
collaboration, to Valentina Mariani.

Similarly, Piet van Staalduinen has been continuously involved with the project
in one way or another, initially via his supervisory role in the NAM project, then
with a small collaboration (from my side) into the project Onderzoek naar de
oorzaken van bouwkundige schade in Groningen, funded by NCG. Later, we
worked together while defining a strategy for soil-structure interaction, and he
was present even during my Go/NoGo meeting. In his involvement with the
Commissie Mijnbouwschade and advisor for IMG, he has kept track of most of
my work. Piet’s critical feedback and recurrent praise for my work is greatly
appreciated. Thanks are also given to Pieter van Gelder for the useful
feedback at my Go/NoGo.
Foremost, great thanks must go to Michele Longo. It is not without reason that
he is co-author in the majority of my papers; the Maestro Michele has been the
driving force behind most of the FE models I’ve used in this work. While we
discussed together much of the conceptualising work to define the models,

Acknowledgements

Later, my PhD benefited greatly from our collaboration with IMG in the project
Advies Schadebeoordeling IMG. Several people from IMG must be
acknowledged: Bas Schultze for his leadership role, Thijs Franssen for his legal
perspective, and Herke Stuit for his guidance and supervision. This part of the
project was also conducted in collaboration with TNO; the interaction with
TNO is extensive. I must thank Chris Geurts for his ideas about my work,
Davide Moretti for some interesting questions, and Huibert Borsje for his
lectures on the practical side of damage assessment. Some of his lectures were
part of the Kennistafels organised by BuildinG, to which I was also invited to
speak by Jelle Pama. The feedback by Arie Koot, from Zonneveld, supervising
projects with IMG, is also appreciated.

lxxii

Acknowledgements

Michele took to himself the actual implementation of them, struggling with
DIANA and our limited computational resources. The capability to run batches
of models automatically was only possible due to his efforts. Without his
contribution, the results needed to understand damage, would be missing.
Much of the calibration of models against the experiments is thanks to Michele;
hereby my deep appreciation.
The early experiments could only have been realised thanks to the organising
and execution work of Edwin Meulman. The initial interpretation of these
experiments was conducted by him. Much of what I learned about working in
the lab is thanks to Edwin. Our collaboration in the NeHoBo project was also
enriching for me and is much appreciated.
Of course, several people are to be thanked for my possibility to follow a PhD.
Principally, Jan Rots, who has been a leading figure since the beginning. Jan’s
feedback, brainstorming, and teachings have been a constant motivation for
me. Especially his insightful questions, to which he often already knew the
answers, have been helpful to me. His role as promotor, trust in my work, praise
of my writing, and alignment with my vision, have made sure this project
became a success.
Similarly, Karel Terwel, who also supervised my MSc graduation project, is to
be thanked for my decision to proceed with research. Without his
encouragement, I would be doing something else. During the research, Karel
provided expert judgment on damage forensics; in the later stages of my PhD,
his quick feedback helped shape my results and conclusions in meaningful
ways.
Also Bas Jonkman had a hand in steering me towards research and ultimately
a PhD; this is greatly appreciated. Moreover, during my work at the university, I
have been involved in other projects, specifically at the hydraulic section. Here
I also looked at the behaviour of masonry buildings during floods. The
collaboration with Jeremy Bricker, and M. Andres Diaz-Loaiza was rewarding
for me. For the experiments at Flood Proof Holland I must also thank Jean-Paul
de Garde and Lindsey Schwidder. Moreover, the cooperation with Karin de
Bruijn, from Deltares, is well appreciated.
During my involvement with the hydraulic section, I also worked with Davide
Wüthrich. We traveled to Germany to look at building damage. This also
resulted in a collaboration with Jan Oetjen and Harish Selvam from the
Rheinisch Westfalische Technische Hochschule Aachen. Their perspective in
building damage and hydraulics is valued.

Acknowledgements

lxxiii

Furthermore, much of the late experimental work wouldn’t have been possible
without Maria Belen Gaggero. Belen took over my ideas about self-healing
mortar and structural strengthening with glass, and, for the self-healing
process, she made them her own. For assessing the effect of the glass-timber
window, she conducted tests on masonry walls, which have been invaluable for
my research, too. Coordinating laboratory work without her help would have
been much more demanding. Moreover, she participated in my course in the
Bend & Break minor, where she taught the students about bond-wrench tests.
Belen’s presence in our office was always uplifting. Her organisation skills were
also inspiring for me. For all of this, I am very grateful.
Similarly, Alfonso Prosperi is to be thanked for many a brainstorming session,
for his review/testing of my code and critical observations about some of my
results. Our off-topic discussions were always a welcome distraction on our way
to the coffee machine. I also thank Alfonso for giving me the challenge of
guidance; this has helped me become a better supervisor. In a similar way, I am
thankful to the many MSc students that have allowed me to coach them
during their projects.

Some collaborations were also international. I was invited by the EUCENTRE to
use DIC on one of their specimens. I am thankful to the team at the time, and
especially to Francesco Graziotti for some small discussions. Moreover, with
the University of Bologna, we have had several visiting MSc students; I am
thankful to Giovanni Castellazzi for the joint supervision of these students,
together with Anjali Mehrotra, who was a member of our group as of recently.
Indeed, I am thankful to the group of Structural Mechanics for having been my
professional family during this period. I cannot mention everyone individually

Acknowledgements

Naturally, laboratory experiments wouldn’t have been possible without the
support of the Lab Staff. In particular, Georgios Stamoulis and Kees van Beek
have been instrumental in conducting the tests and providing advice over
important choices. John Hermsen, with his dry humour and expertise in metal
fabrication, and Ruben Kunz, with his invaluable timber skills, are also
acknowledged. Management by Peter de Vries, who also provided useful
ideas and suggestions, is appreciated, too. Early experiments were also
possible only due to the help of Lucia Licciardello, Carlijn van Hoogdalem,
and Jakub Pawlowicz. Finally, the professional mason, Oscar Storm,
responsible for much of our replicated masonry samples, is also thanked.
Student assistants Andrea Gena, Tu Martin, Qingpeng Li, Sneha Kasturi, and
Robin Straathof are also acknowledged. Experimental work also benefitted
from interactions with Michele Mirra and Geert Ravenshorst, from whom I
learned about timber structures and its connections to masonry.

lxxiv

Acknowledgements

but will emphasise instead the many fruitful discussions and collaborations:
Rita Esposito, for her committed suggestions and ideas on material
characterisation; Francesco Messali, for his interest in the project and for other
discussions on typology approaches for NEN; Manimaran Pari, for his work on
SLA and on recent CaSi models; and, Marianthi Sousamli, for our collaboration
in the soil-structure interaction interface and the various conversations about
modelling. In particular, the work of Samira Jafari has been exceedingly useful.
Similarly, thanks are given to the entire department of Materials, Mechanics,
Management and Design (3MD) for the many spontaneous conversations in our
hallways, the department dinners, and the team-building activities at the beach
or in the city. Thanks go to Jaap Meijer, for always being available with
knowledge about the logistics of the university, to Iris Nederhof, for much
administrative work, and to the other support and secretary staff for all their
help. I’m also thankful to Bert Sluijs for his leadership of the department
during most of the time I was busy with this project.
Furthermore, thanks are due to many colleagues, with whom I also
collaborated or consulted within the group, the department or the faculty:
Marteen Bakker, for the coordination of the B&B minor; Karel van Dalen, for
his advice about dynamics; Giorgia Giardina, for her previous work into
masonry cracking; Max Hendriks, for his help in supervising students and
involving me in concrete topics; Pierre Hoogenboom, for his expertise with
the graphical method for forces; Mandy Korff, for her mastery of geotechnics
and supervision; Roderik Lindenbergh, for including me in the graduation
projects of geoscience students; Sander Pasterkamp, for his knowledge about
building codes and building practice; and, Roel Schipper, for his insight about
damage and supervising students.
In addition, I would like to thank the Graduate School for its role in my
doctoral education. The programme and courses it organised have been a
constructive contribution to my schooling. Similarly, the support staff at the
university, including the ICT section, financial division, and facility
management, are thanked.
I am also thankful to the many academics and professionals I have met at
several international conferences. They are too many to mention without
forgetting someone, so I will refrain to specify. Instead, I would like to highlight
the many interesting presentations, our discussions about the state-of-the-art
or about life around the globe, our joint travels and visits to new places; these
have all been extremely enriching.

Acknowledgements

lxxv

Acknowledgements

Further, I would like to thank my partner, Luka, who has been supportive
throughout my entire PhD trajectory. Likewise, my friends and family, who
have provided a necessary respite when it was due. Finally, I would like to
thank my parents, who were the main inspiration for my commitment to a PhD,
especially my mother, who I am sure would be proud today.

Extended Table of Contents
For quick searching in the physical version of this book, this extended table of
contents is provided at the end.

Abstract

I

Table of Contents

II

Summary
English

VII

Samenvatting
Dutch

XXI

Chapter 1
Introduction

1

1.1. Relevance.................................................................................................2
1.1.1. Societal Relevance
1.1.2. Scientific Relevance

2
2

1.2. State of the Art and Knowledge Gaps .....................................................4
1.2.1. Literature and its Limitations
1.2.2. Knowledge Gaps

4
6

1.3. Research Objective ..................................................................................8
1.4. Research Methodology ............................................................................9

Chapter 2
Damage Metric for Masonry Cracking

13

2.1. Background and Introduction ................................................................15
2.1.1. Necessity for Objective Measurement
2.1.2. Damage in Masonry
2.1.3. Fracture Mechanics and Cracks-based Damage
2.1.4. Visible Cracks and Visibly Aggravated Cracks
2.1.5. Limitations of Existing Approaches

16
16
19
22
24

2.2. The Ψ Damage Parameter .....................................................................28
2.2.1. Damage Classification Based on Visibility and Ease of Repair
2.2.2. Cost of Repair
2.2.3. Proposal for Ψ Damage Intensity Parameter

28
29
32

2.4.1. Transitory and Residual Damage
2.4.2. Summary of Advantages, Disadvantages and Limitations
2.4.3. Potential Future Improvements
2.4.4. Relevance of Ψ for Modelling and for Real Life Uses

47
48
49
51

2.5. Conclusions about Ψ, ∆Ψ, Ψ0 ...............................................................51

Chapter 3
Experiments to Characterise Cracks

53

3.1. Definition of Experiments to Investigate Light Damage........................55
3.1.1. Loading Protocol for Light Damage and Evaluating Repetition
3.1.2. DIC Monitoring System for Experimental Crack-Based Damage
3.1.3. Overview of the Tests Performed from 2017 to 2024

56
63
68

3.2. Results from Experiments on Walls and Spandrels ................................73
3.2.1. Summary of Results on Wall Tests
3.2.2. Summary of Results on Spandrel Tests
3.2.3. Lessons about Crack Propagation
3.2.4. Conclusions about Crack Propagation
3.2.5. Four Ways to Utilise the Experimental Results

73
79
84
91
92

3.3. Crack-Based Drift Limits from Experimental Results ..............................93
3.3.1. Drift Limits for Light Damage Lacking in Literature
3.3.2. Repetition in the Loading Protocol of Experiments
3.3.3. Relationship between Crack-based Damage and in-plane Drift
3.3.4. Discussion and Comparison to Other Drift Limits
3.3.5. Summary of Drift Limits for Light Damage

93
95
96
102
104

3.4. Conclusions: Experiments to Understand Crack Behaviour.................105

Chapter 4
Damaging (Multi)Hazards and Modelling their Effects

107

4.1. Hazards and Multi-hazards ...................................................................109
4.1.1. Hazards
4.1.2. Multi-hazards

110
111

Summary
Chapter 1
Chapter 2

2.4. Discussion ..............................................................................................47

Chapter 3

41
44
46

Chapter 4

2.3.1. Ψ in Experiments surveyed with Digital Image Correlation
2.3.2. Damage Aggravation by ∆Ψ in Finite Element Models
2.3.3. Predictions with Ψ

Chapter 5

2.3. Utilisation: Examples of Application of Ψ ..............................................41

Chapter 6

35
39
39

Chapter 7

2.2.4. Thresholds for Ψ, ∆Ψ, and Their Meaning
2.2.5. Agglomeration of Ψ
2.2.6. Perception of Damage and Ψ

lxxvii

Appendices

Table of Contents

lxxviii

Table of Contents

4.2. Overview of Actions causing Damage to Masonry Buildings ..............113
4.2.1. Vibrations
4.2.2. Restrained Deformations
4.2.3. Imposed Deformations
4.2.4. Out of Plane Loading
4.2.5. Gravity Overloading

114
115
115
115
116

4.3. Calibrating Crack Behaviour from Experiments into FEM Models ......117
4.3.1. Background on Validation Experiments
4.3.2. Overview of Calibration Models
4.3.3. Model Properties and Boundaries
4.3.4. Calibration of Spandrels and Walls with Openings
4.3.5. Additional Model for Walls with Pre-Damage
4.3.6. FEM Model for Shear Walls
4.3.7. Conclusions from the Calibration Process

118
119
120
125
130
133
137

4.4. Modelling Damage: Shrinkage, Settlements, and Vibrations ..............139
4.4.1. Modelling Restrained Deformations: Shrinkage
4.4.2. Modelling Imposed Deformations: Settlements
4.4.3. Dynamic, Non-Linear Time History Analysis: Vibrations
4.4.4. Modelling Multi-hazards

139
141
143
146

4.5. Conclusions: Modelling and Calibration..............................................147

Chapter 5
Fragility

149

5.1. Introduction .........................................................................................150
5.2. Extrapolation to Non-Linear Dynamic Analyses ..................................152
5.2.1. Background on Experiments and Calibration
5.2.2. Setup of Extrapolation Models (Based on Field Cases)
5.2.3. Results from Extrapolation Models

152
153
161

5.3. Regression of Damage Function from FEM Results.............................167
5.3.1. Reasoned Regression Model Considering Ψ0
5.3.2. Model Uncertainty
5.3.3. Surrogate Model with Machine Learning

167
173
175

5.4. Fragility Curves for Seismic Vibrations.................................................178
5.4.1. Probabilistic distributions and Parameters
5.4.2. Results of Monte Carlo Simulation
5.4.3. Comparisons to other Studies
5.4.4. Fragility Maps

178
180
184
187

5.5. Fragility Curves for Settlements from Soil Curvatures .........................191
5.5.1. Overview of Semi-Coupled Models of Masonry Façades
5.5.2. Fragility Curves for Soil Angular Distortion: β vs. Ψ

191
198

5.6. Conclusions: Probability of Damage and Aggravation ........................206

Chapter 6
Hastening: Damage Accumulation Function

209

6.1. Analysis of Repetition Effect in Experiments .......................................212

Summary

lxxix

Chapter 1

Table of Contents

6.2.1. Methodology: Brief Description of the FE Models
6.2.2. Variations investigated with the FE Models
6.2.3. Model Results: Effect of Repetition
6.2.3. Summary of Observations from Repetitions Models

218
221
223
228

Chapter 2

6.2. Damage Accumulation due to Repetition in FEM Models ..................218

6.3.1. Function for Ψ from Variable PGV Sequences
6.3.2. Comparison of DAF against Model Results
6.3.3. Comparison of DAF against Experimental Results
6.3.4. Application: Probability Maps for Accumulated Damage

229
235
241
244

Chapter 3

6.3. Damage Accumulation Function (DAF) ...............................................229

7.1.1. Objective, Continuous Scale for Damage and its Aggravation
7.1.2. Monitoring Crack-Based Damage Aggravation from Experiments
7.1.3. Damage Aggravation by Subsequent Actions
7.1.4. The Effect of Repetition on Damage Accumulation
7.1.5. Answer to the Main Objective

258
260
261
263
264

7.2. Relevance and Contributions ...............................................................265
7.2.1. Scientific Relevance
7.2.2. Societal Relevance
7.2.3. Utilisation

265
265
267

7.3. Limitations - Restrictions of the Scope ................................................268
7.3.1. One Parameter to Describe it All
7.3.2. Single-Wythe Brick Walls and In-Plane Damage
7.3.3. Quasi-static Extrapolation to Dynamic Actions
7.3.4. Repetition at the Material Model

268
269
270
271

7.4. Recommendations for Further Study ...................................................271
7.4.1. Crack-Based Damage in Modern Masonry
7.4.2. Mixed-Mode Fracture and Degradation
7.4.3. Monitoring Damage in the Field

271
272
273

Chapter 5

7.1. Answers and Conclusions ....................................................................258

Chapter 6

257

Chapter 7

Chapter 7
Conclusions and Outlook

249
252

Appendices

6.4.1. Definition of ‘Hastening’ in the Context of Damage
6.4.2. Time as the Hazard

Chapter 4

6.4. Concept of Damage Hastening ...........................................................248

lxxx

Table of Contents
7.4.4. Strategies for Repair, Mitigation, and Adaptation

273

7.5. Outlook ................................................................................................275
7.5.1. Climate Change and Building Fragility
7.5.2. Cracking and the Energy Transition
7.5.3. Risk Reluctance, Acceptance and Damage Policy

List of Publications

275
275
276

277

Journal Papers ............................................................................................277
Conference Papers .....................................................................................278
Scientific Reports ........................................................................................280

Bibliography

281

List of Authors .............................................................................................310

Appendix A
Overview of Related Work

i

A.1. Laboratory High-Resolution Monitoring with DIC ...................................ii
A.2. Geometry Statistics from 3D·BAG ..........................................................iv
A.3. Experiments and Models of NeHoBo Floors .........................................vii
A.4. SLaMA-based, parametric computational models for pushover ADRS
analyses of masonry typologies .............................................................ix
A.5. Strengthening: Structural Glass .............................................................xii
A.6. Repair: Self-Healing Mortar...................................................................xiii
A.7. Out-of-Plane of Masonry Walls during Hydrostatic Loading.................xiv
A.8. The Action of Debris during the German Flood of 2021 ......................xvi
A.9. Strategy for Safety Assessment of Historical Quay Walls ....................xviii
A.10. Experiments during course ‘Masonry Bend & Break’..........................xxi
A.11. Analysis of Waarts’ Probabilistic Estimation of Damage ....................xxii
A.12. InSAR Analysis of Cyclic Soil Movements in Norg ............................xxiii
A.13. The Effect of Deep Subsidence on Masonry Façades.......................xxiv
A.14. The Effect of Combined Horizontal Strain and Curvature on Masonry
Façades from Soil Movements ............................................................xxv
A.15. The Effect of Truck Vibrations in Comparison to Earthquakes’ ........xxvii

Appendix B
Ψ Damage Parameter

xxix

B.1. Equations and Definition of Ψ .............................................................xxix

Appendix E
Loppersum Visit

xliii

Appendix F
Dataset

xlix

Appendix G
Tool for Crack Tracking

li

G.1. Application of DIC for Monitoring of Masonry Test Samples in the
Laboratory ...............................................................................................li
G.2. Theory and Programming of DIC ..........................................................liii
G.3. Optimisation and Calibration of DIC .....................................................lix

Curriculum Vitæ

lxvii

Propositions

lxix

Acknowledgements

lxxi

Extended Table of Contents

lxxvi

Summary
Chapter 1

xxxix

Chapter 2

Appendix D
Glossary

Chapter 3

xxxv

Chapter 4

Appendix C
Supervised MSc Projects

Chapter 5

B.3. Perception of Damage .......................................................................xxxiv

Chapter 6

B.2. Table with Practical examples of Ψ and ∆Ψ .......................................xxxii

Chapter 7

lxxxi

Appendices

Table of Contents

